
=== PART 1 (type: mcq-reply) ===
1: Part one. You will hear some sentences. You will hear each sentence twice. Choose the correct reply to each sentence, A, B, or C. Mark your answers on the answer sheet. You now have some time to look at questions.
2: Speaker one. I'm thinking of going on a road trip this summer. I'm thinking of going on a road trip this summer.
3: Speaker two. I'm struggling to find motivation for work lately. I'm struggling to find motivation for work lately.
4: Speaker three. What do you think of Tom's new computer? What do you think of Tom's new computer?
5: Speaker four. Can you order a dinner for me, please? Can you order a dinner for me, please?
6: Speaker five. I'm planning to start a vegetable garden in my backyard. I'm planning to start a vegetable garden in my backyard.
7: Speaker six. We need to prepare for the final test. We need to prepare for the final test.
8: Speaker seven. You should go to the gym if you want. You should go to the gym if you want.
9: Speaker eight. What do you think about taking a family vacation? What do you think about taking a family vacation?
10: That is the end of part one.

=== PART 2 (type: gap-fill-form) ===
1: Narrator: Part two. You will hear someone giving a talk. For each question, fill in the missing information in the numbered space. Write one word or a number for each answer.
2: You now have some time to look at questions.
3: You will hear a recorded message giving information about a museum.
4: Woman: This is the information line for the Dorset Chocolate Museum, the home of chocolate lovers and the ideal place to spend an afternoon.
5: Do you know who used cocoa beans as money in the 16th century, or where chocolate was drunk as a medicine? At the Dorset Chocolate Museum, you'll find out about all this and more.
6: Our fascinating displays will guide you through the history of chocolate making from its earliest use in South America to the modern day.
7: Then, move on to the demonstration area of our small family run factory. Here, you can watch our skilled chocolate makers making a variety of chocolate bars, as well as other sweets, and you can even have a try at making your own.
8: We open 7 days a week from 12:00 midday till 6:00 p.m., except in July and August when we are open until 8:00 p.m.
9: From September to December, we are open weekends only.
10: We are closed throughout January, but open again from the 1st of February.
11: Admission is 10 pounds for adults and 5 pounds for children up to the age of 16, while children under five are free.
12: Students pay 2 pounds less, so that's 8 pounds, but only if they have a student ID card.
13: Special reduced entrance fees are available for groups of 10 or more people.
14: We can also make special arrangements for schools on weekdays between 12:00 and 4:00 p.m. All groups will be provided with a private tour guide, and at the end, each member of the group will receive a bag of lovely handmade chocolates.
15: Our special range of chocolate boxes and bars is always available to buy in our gift shop. For more details, phone the gift shop on 01632 960054.
16: Narrator: Now, listen again.
17: Woman: This is the information line for the Dorset Chocolate Museum, the home of chocolate lovers and the ideal place to spend an afternoon.
18: Do you know who used cocoa beans as money in the 16th century, or where chocolate was drunk as a medicine? At the Dorset Chocolate Museum, you'll find out about all this and more.
19: Our fascinating displays will guide you through the history of chocolate making from its earliest use in South America to the modern day.
20: Then, move on to the demonstration area of our small family run factory. Here, you can watch our skilled chocolate makers making a variety of chocolate bars, as well as other sweets, and you can even have a try at making your own.
21: We open 7 days a week from 12:00 midday till 6:00 p.m., except in July and August when we are open until 8:00 p.m.
22: From September to December, we are open weekends only.
23: We are closed throughout January, but open again from the 1st of February.
24: Admission is 10 pounds for adults and 5 pounds for children up to the age of 16, while children under five are free.
25: Students pay 2 pounds less, so that's 8 pounds, but only if they have a student ID card.
26: Special reduced entrance fees are available for groups of 10 or more people.
27: We can also make special arrangements for schools on weekdays between 12:00 and 4:00 p.m. All groups will be provided with a private tour guide, and at the end, each member of the group will receive a bag of lovely handmade chocolates.
28: Our special range of chocolate boxes and bars is always available to buy in our gift shop. For more details, phone the gift shop on 01632 960054.
29: Narrator: That is the end of part two.

=== PART 3 (type: matching-speakers) ===
1: Part three.
2: You will hear people speaking in different situations.
3: Match each speaker, 15 to 18, to the options, A-F.
4: There are two extra options which you do not need to use.
5: Mark your answers on the answer sheet.
6: You now have some time to look at questions.
7: 
8: Speaker one.
9: I'd never really considered starting my own business until last year.
10: My friends were always on at me about what a good idea it would be, but I couldn't see the point.
11: It wasn't as if I didn't have a good job, but then, when there was talk about reducing the workforce, and I was offered a lot of money to leave, I thought, why not try setting up on my own?
12: I suppose I realized that I really didn't have that much to lose.
13: There were the usual initial problems of course, most of them financial, as I struggled to get things off the ground, but I don't regret my decision.
14: 
15: Speaker two.
16: Although I know a lot of people are forced into this position through redundancy or whatever, in my case it all started when I fell out with my boss about a sales plan.
17: He was so patronizing and suddenly I felt I just couldn't take anymore.
18: Next day, I went back and handed in my resignation.
19: The thought of having my own business had always been at the back of my mind, I suppose, and this seemed the perfect moment to go for it.
20: My wife had mixed feelings at the time, but she can hardly complain now, we've never been so well off and can now look forward to a comfortable retirement.
21: It's such a relief not having someone looking over my shoulder the whole time.
22: 
23: Speaker three.
24: My husband had always liked the idea of rural life, and when a job in a village school came up, he felt it was a chance he couldn't miss.
25: The move to the country was difficult for me though, because it meant having to give up my position in a really good company.
26: I could have commuted, but it would have taken hours every day.
27: There were no businesses like that in the area, so it was a case of setting up on my own or going into early retirement.
28: I couldn't have managed without a computer and access to the internet.
29: I must admit that I miss my colleagues, but I make sure I see them if I'm in London.
30: 
31: Speaker four.
32: The idea came to me after we'd had a lot of work done on our house.
33: It left us really hard up and I found I was having to do a lot of the making good myself to keep costs down.
34: Although I was a complete novice, friends who came round commented on what a great job I'd done and kept on at me to do up their places.
35: It was a bit of a leap in the dark because I was trained as a careers advisor, but I've managed to persuade a friend of mine who does have some experience to come in with me, and here we are with our own little decorating company.
36: Although I've yet to make my fortune, every job brings a fresh set of challenges to overcome, which is something I never had before.
37: 
38: Now you'll hear the recording again.
39: Speaker one.
40: I'd never really considered starting my own business until last year.
41: My friends were always on at me about what a good idea it would be, but I couldn't see the point.
42: It wasn't as if I didn't have a good job, but then, when there was talk about reducing the workforce, and I was offered a lot of money to leave, I thought, why not try setting up on my own?
43: I suppose I realized that I really didn't have that much to lose.
44: There were the usual initial problems of course, most of them financial, as I struggled to get things off the ground, but I don't regret my decision.
45: 
46: Speaker two.
47: Although I know a lot of people are forced into this position through redundancy or whatever, in my case it all started when I fell out with my boss about a sales plan.
48: He was so patronizing and suddenly I felt I just couldn't take anymore.
49: Next day, I went back and handed in my resignation.
50: The thought of having my own business had always been at the back of my mind, I suppose, and this seemed the perfect moment to go for it.
51: My wife had mixed feelings at the time, but she can hardly complain now, we've never been so well off and can now look forward to a comfortable retirement.
52: It's such a relief not having someone looking over my shoulder the whole time.
53: 
54: Speaker three.
55: My husband had always liked the idea of rural life, and when a job in a village school came up, he felt it was a chance he couldn't miss.
56: The move to the country was difficult for me though, because it meant having to give up my position in a really good company.
57: I could have commuted, but it would have taken hours every day.
58: There were no businesses like that in the area, so it was a case of setting up on my own or going into early retirement.
59: I couldn't have managed without a computer and access to the internet.
60: I must admit that I miss my colleagues, but I make sure I see them if I'm in London.
61: 
62: Speaker four.
63: The idea came to me after we'd had a lot of work done on our house.
64: It left us really hard up and I found I was having to do a lot of the making good myself to keep costs down.
65: Although I was a complete novice, friends who came round commented on what a great job I'd done and kept on at me to do up their places.
66: It was a bit of a leap in the dark because I was trained as a careers advisor, but I've managed to persuade a friend of mine who does have some experience to come in with me, and here we are with our own little decorating company.
67: Although I've yet to make my fortune, every job brings a fresh set of challenges to overcome, which is something I never had before.
68: 
69: That is the end of part three.

=== PART 4 (type: map-labeling) ===
1: Part four. You will hear someone giving a talk.
2: Label the places 19 to 23 on the map A-H.
3: There are three extra options which you do not need to use. Mark your answers on the answer sheet.
4: You now have some time to look at questions.
5: 
6: Okay. Let me tell you about some of the changes that have been made and some things that have been retained.
7: If you look at this map, you'll see the familiar outline of the park with the river forming the northern boundary, and a gate in each of the other three walls.
8: The statue of Diane Gosforth has been moved.
9: It used to be close to the South gate, but it's now immediately to the north of the Lily pond, almost in the center of the park, which makes it much more visible.
10: There's a new area of wooden sculptures, which are on the river bank, where the path from the East gate makes a sharp bend.
11: There are two areas that are particularly intended for children.
12: The playground has been enlarged and improved, and that's between the river and the path that leads from the pond to the river.
13: Then, there's a new maze, a circular series of paths separated by low hedges.
14: That's near the West gate.
15: You can go north from there towards the river, and then turn left to reach it.
16: There have been tennis courts in the park for many years, and they've been doubled from four to eight.
17: They're still in the southwest corner of the park, where there's a right angle bend in the path.
18: Something else I'd like to mention is the new fitness area.
19: This is right next to the Lily pond on the same side as the West gate.
20: Now, as you're all gardeners, I'm sure you'll like to hear about the plants that have been chosen for the park.
21: 
22: Now listen again.
23: Okay. Let me tell you about some of the changes that have been made and some things that have been retained.
24: If you look at this map, you'll see the familiar outline of the park with the river forming the northern boundary, and a gate in each of the other three walls.
25: The statue of Diane Gosforth has been moved.
26: It used to be close to the South gate, but it's now immediately to the north of the Lily pond, almost in the center of the park, which makes it much more visible.
27: There's a new area of wooden sculptures, which are on the river bank, where the path from the East gate makes a sharp bend.
28: There are two areas that are particularly intended for children.
29: The playground has been enlarged and improved, and that's between the river and the path that leads from the pond to the river.
30: Then, there's a new maze, a circular series of paths separated by low hedges.
31: That's near the West gate.
32: You can go north from there towards the river, and then turn left to reach it.
33: There have been tennis courts in the park for many years, and they've been doubled from four to eight.
34: They're still in the southwest corner of the park, where there's a right angle bend in the path.
35: Something else I'd like to mention is the new fitness area.
36: This is right next to the Lily pond on the same side as the West gate.
37: Now, as you're all gardeners, I'm sure you'll like to hear about the plants that have been chosen for the park.
38: That is the end of part four.

=== PART 5 (type: mcq-extracts) ===
1: Narrator: Part five. You will hear three extracts.
2: Choose the correct answer, A, B or C, for each question, 24 to 29.
3: There are two questions for each extract.
4: Mark your answers on the answer sheet.
5: Extract one.
6: You hear part of an interview with a broadcaster who's talking about a series of programs he presented about landscape painting.
7: Now look at questions one and two.
8: 
9: Woman: Why did you decide to include a painting by a famous politician?
10: Man: I wanted to remind viewers that amateur painting has its own purpose, uh, that scores and scores of people paint for themselves as that politician did.
11: And I liked his daughter's explanation that it helped to give him some respite from the pressures of public life.
12: I thought that was important to focus on so that we weren't just talking about painters as professionals who had really cracked it and who taught us things about their technique.
13: Woman: You draw yourself, don't you?
14: Man: Yes.
15: I've always liked it, though I'm afraid my attempts aren't very good, so I keep them purely for my own amusement.
16: Uh, the intensity of drawing is always a great thrill.
17: Uh, I can't say it's a relief, which it obviously is for some people.
18: You have to use your eyes to look more carefully at a scene than you would if you were just out for a walk or even if you were taking a photograph as an amateur.
19: There's something about drawing that forces you to see things and think about them.
20: 
21: Narrator: Now you'll hear the recording again.
22: Woman: Why did you decide to include a painting by a famous politician?
23: Man: I wanted to remind viewers that amateur painting has its own purpose, uh, that scores and scores of people paint for themselves as that politician did.
24: And I liked his daughter's explanation that it helped to give him some respite from the pressures of public life.
25: I thought that was important to focus on so that we weren't just talking about painters as professionals who had really cracked it and who taught us things about their technique.
26: Woman: You draw yourself, don't you?
27: Man: Yes.
28: I've always liked it, though I'm afraid my attempts aren't very good, so I keep them purely for my own amusement.
29: Uh, the intensity of drawing is always a great thrill.
30: Uh, I can't say it's a relief, which it obviously is for some people.
31: You have to use your eyes to look more carefully at a scene than you would if you were just out for a walk or even if you were taking a photograph as an amateur.
32: There's something about drawing that forces you to see things and think about them.
33: 
34: Narrator: Extract two.
35: You hear an amateur pilot called Gina Nesbitt talking about doing aerobatics in her small plane.
36: Now look at questions three and four.
37: 
38: Man: I've only ever been up in a plane once where the pilot turned the plane over in an aerobatic display, and I've never been more scared or felt sicker.
39: Do you get that sinking feeling too, Gina?
40: Woman: I'm very fortunate in that I don't.
41: This came as a pleasant surprise to me because I do get terribly seasick.
42: I find that what's routine and what I'm used to doing isn't frightening.
43: Learning some of the new maneuvers though can be quite daunting because this is a single-seater plane, so the first time I do anything new, I'm on my own, except for the guidance of my coach who's on the ground.
44: Man: What's the real thrill for you of performing these difficult maneuvers in competitions?
45: Woman: It's exciting, of course, but ultimately the reward comes from knowing that you've done it with precision.
46: It involves an unusual combination of mental preparation, physical preparation, and skill.
47: It's not as difficult as you might first think to fly the sequences of movements.
48: What is difficult is doing it to a high enough standard to avoid the faults the judges are looking out for.
49: 
50: Narrator: Now you'll hear the recording again.
51: Man: I've only ever been up in a plane once where the pilot turned the plane over in an aerobatic display, and I've never been more scared or felt sicker.
52: Do you get that sinking feeling too, Gina?
53: Woman: I'm very fortunate in that I don't.
54: This came as a pleasant surprise to me because I do get terribly seasick.
55: I find that what's routine and what I'm used to doing isn't frightening.
56: Learning some of the new maneuvers though can be quite daunting because this is a single-seater plane, so the first time I do anything new, I'm on my own, except for the guidance of my coach who's on the ground.
57: Man: What's the real thrill for you of performing these difficult maneuvers in competitions?
58: Woman: It's exciting, of course, but ultimately the reward comes from knowing that you've done it with precision.
59: It involves an unusual combination of mental preparation, physical preparation, and skill.
60: It's not as difficult as you might first think to fly the sequences of movements.
61: What is difficult is doing it to a high enough standard to avoid the faults the judges are looking out for.
62: 
63: Narrator: Extract three.
64: You overhear a chef called George talking to a friend about his daily routine.
65: Now look at questions five and six.
66: 
67: Woman: Oh, I'm exhausted.
68: It took an hour to drive 5 kilometers.
69: Man: You should do what I do and use a motorbike.
70: Woman: Is it much quicker?
71: Man: It is a bit, because you avoid some queues.
72: The great thing is, when I put on my helmet, I'm shut away, you know, in my own little world.
73: And that means I arrive feeling quite calm.
74: I started riding a motorbike where I grew up in the country because there weren't any buses.
75: Woman: So, is that your most prized possession?
76: I was asked recently what my favorite thing at home was.
77: As a chef, I imagine yours is something in the kitchen, your cooker perhaps.
78: Man: The one at the restaurant is fantastic because it was specially designed for me.
79: It's hard to say here.
80: My family love the kitchen table where they chat for hours.
81: Given the late hours I work, I hardly participate in that.
82: No, my workplace is so hot and sticky that what I long for is a shower when I get home.
83: I feel the stress of the day disappear with the water.
84: Odd thing to choose, isn't it?
85: 
86: Narrator: Now you'll hear the recording again.
87: Woman: Oh, I'm exhausted.
88: It took an hour to drive 5 kilometers.
89: Man: You should do what I do and use a motorbike.
90: Woman: Is it much quicker?
91: Man: It is a bit, because you avoid some queues.
92: The great thing is, when I put on my helmet, I'm shut away, you know, in my own little world.
93: And that means I arrive feeling quite calm.
94: I started riding a motorbike where I grew up in the country because there weren't any buses.
95: Woman: So, is that your most prized possession?
96: I was asked recently what my favorite thing at home was.
97: As a chef, I imagine yours is something in the kitchen, your cooker perhaps.
98: Man: The one at the restaurant is fantastic because it was specially designed for me.
99: It's hard to say here.
100: My family love the kitchen table where they chat for hours.
101: Given the late hours I work, I hardly participate in that.
102: No, my workplace is so hot and sticky that what I long for is a shower when I get home.
103: I feel the stress of the day disappear with the water.
104: Odd thing to choose, isn't it?
105: 
106: Narrator: That is the end of part five.

=== PART 6 (type: sentence-completion) ===
1: Narrator: Part six.
2: You'll hear an art teacher called Rosa Weston, giving a talk about making mosaics, works of art that are made out of small pieces of glass and stone.
3: Complete the sentences.
4: You now have 45 seconds to look at part two.
5: Narrator: I'd been teaching art for about 10 years when I went on holiday to Greece.
6: While I was there, I became really interested in the art of making mosaics, and decided to include this in the courses I run.
7: Many people assume that the Romans invented mosaic, but it was the Greeks who were the true craftsmen, and they, in turn, probably picked it up from the Sumerians.
8: But it was the Romans who brought mosaics to Britain, and apart from the introduction of nylon backing to hold the tiles together, the techniques themselves haven't changed much over 5000 years.
9: It's the designs which have undergone a really radical change.
10: In the recent past, modern mosaics have been restricted to the walls of public libraries and the odd swimming pool, and by and large, it looked as if the true art of the mosaic could well disappear.
11: Fortunately, that has not happened.
12: People often ask me why I prefer to spend hours teaching my students to stick tiny squares onto tiles when I could be doing something else.
13: And it's certainly the case that the process demands both time and motivation on occasions.
14: It can even give you a really bad headache.
15: But, in fact, there's something very therapeutic about it.
16: I think it has something to do with breaking things up and then reconstructing them.
17: For every course I teach, we have jars and jars of brightly colored glass, odd bits of China, broken plates and dishes, and most people just can't wait to start sticking them onto larger stretches of concrete.
18: For the beginners, we produce mosaic packs which contain all the essentials you need and explain clearly how to go about things.
19: Each course includes a weekend workshop, which is attended by the majority of the students, and it's actually a wonderful way of relaxing.
20: I'm often asked if I do puzzles, and it's not such a silly question as it sounds because it's a very good comparison of skills.
21: Some people do get a bit scared faced with all that choice, but that's why the mosaic packs are so popular, but I try to teach people to be inventive as well.
22: If you look around yourself, there's plenty of evidence that the art is enjoying a revival.
23: Not only do you see mosaic ashtrays and soap dishes, but you can actually now find them decorating underground station walls.
24: Now, I'm not suggesting that you start pulling your own home to pieces and replacing everything with mosaics, although I often find myself looking at chests of drawers and thinking, just a border perhaps.
25: Still, my reply to my over-anxious students is, alright, I know it takes hours, but after all, it's a labor of love and you have something which will give pleasure for a long time afterwards.
26: Now, if you're interested in trying out the effect in your own home,
27: Narrator: Now you'll hear the recording again.
28: Narrator: I'd been teaching art for about 10 years when I went on holiday to Greece.
29: While I was there, I became really interested in the art of making mosaics, and decided to include this in the courses I run.
30: Many people assume that the Romans invented mosaic, but it was the Greeks who were the true craftsmen, and they, in turn, probably picked it up from the Sumerians.
31: But it was the Romans who brought mosaics to Britain, and apart from the introduction of nylon backing to hold the tiles together, the techniques themselves haven't changed much over 5000 years.
32: It's the designs which have undergone a really radical change.
33: In the recent past, modern mosaics have been restricted to the walls of public libraries and the odd swimming pool, and by and large, it looked as if the true art of the mosaic could well disappear.
34: Fortunately, that has not happened.
35: People often ask me why I prefer to spend hours teaching my students to stick tiny squares onto tiles when I could be doing something else.
36: And it's certainly the case that the process demands both time and motivation on occasions.
37: It can even give you a really bad headache.
38: But, in fact, there's something very therapeutic about it.
39: I think it has something to do with breaking things up and then reconstructing them.
40: For every course I teach, we have jars and jars of brightly colored glass, odd bits of China, broken plates and dishes, and most people just can't wait to start sticking them onto larger stretches of concrete.
41: For the beginners, we produce mosaic packs which contain all the essentials you need and explain clearly how to go about things.
42: Each course includes a weekend workshop, which is attended by the majority of the students, and it's actually a wonderful way of relaxing.
43: I'm often asked if I do puzzles, and it's not such a silly question as it sounds because it's a very good comparison of skills.
44: Some people do get a bit scared faced with all that choice, but that's why the mosaic packs are so popular, but I try to teach people to be inventive as well.
45: If you look around yourself, there's plenty of evidence that the art is enjoying a revival.
46: Not only do you see mosaic ashtrays and soap dishes, but you can actually now find them decorating underground station walls.
47: Now, I'm not suggesting that you start pulling your own home to pieces and replacing everything with mosaics, although I often find myself looking at chests of drawers and thinking, just a border perhaps.
48: Still, my reply to my over-anxious students is, alright, I know it takes hours, but after all, it's a labor of love and you have something which will give pleasure for a long time afterwards.
49: Now, if you're interested in trying out the effect in your own home,
50: Narrator: That is the end of part six.
