=== PART 1 (type: mcq-reply) ===
1: Part one. You will hear some sentences. You will hear each sentence twice. Choose the correct reply to each sentence, A, B or C. Mark your answers on the answer sheet.
2: Speaker one. I have a question, and I need someone to answer it.
3: I have a question, and I need someone to answer it.
4: Speaker two. I was wondering when you would show up.
5: I was wondering when you would show up.
6: Speaker three. What are you going to cook today?
7: What are you going to cook today?
8: Speaker four. That film looks and sounds familiar, isn't it?
9: That film looks and sounds familiar, isn't it?
10: Speaker five. I bet John and Christine are really happy with their trip.
11: I bet John and Christine are really happy with their trip.
12: Speaker six. When do we leave for Tahiti?
13: When do we leave for Tahiti?
14: Speaker seven. Why don't you come with me?
15: Why don't you come with me?
16: Speaker eight. You shouldn't drink soda when you're really thirsty.
17: You shouldn't drink soda when you're really thirsty.
18: Now, listen again.
19: That is the end of part one.

=== PART 2 (type: gap-fill-form) ===
1: Part two.
2: You will hear someone giving a talk.
3: For each question, fill in the missing information in the numbered space.
4: Write one word or a number for each answer.
5: You now have some time to look at questions.
6: You will hear a teacher telling a group of students about a trip they are going on.
7: Good morning, everyone.
8: I want to tell you about the school trip to the castle next week.
9: The coach will be leaving the school at 9:10, so you all need to be there at 8:40 and no later.
10: If anyone is late, we will not wait for you.
11: We will be doing all sorts of activities during the day, but don't forget that you will be doing a project on the castle, so you need to bring a book, I mean, a notebook with you.
12: Don't worry about bringing a camera, as on the last trip, two people lost their cameras.
13: You can always use your phones if you want to take pictures.
14: We should arrive at the castle by 9:45.
15: We won't be going on a guided tour because I know how bored you all get.
16: So, instead, we will go to the gardens where we will have a special painting class.
17: The gardens are very beautiful.
18: All your paintings will be exhibited in the school hall next week.
19: After lunch, you can have a look around the castle for an hour, which will be followed by a special treat.
20: No, that doesn't mean you will go and eat cake.
21: We will be going on a boat down the river.
22: I know that this is a trip that you will really enjoy.
23: Now, those projects I mentioned earlier will be marked by Friday afternoon, so they all need to be handed in by Tuesday afternoon.
24: Not Wednesday morning.
25: Us poor teachers have lots to do, so you must hand your projects in on time.
26: If you want more information to help you write your projects, you can look on the castle website, which is www.rundle.castle.com.
27: I'll spell that for you.
28: That's a r u n d e l.
29: Okay.
30: You can go to your lessons now.
31: Now, listen again.
32: Good morning, everyone.
33: I want to tell you about the school trip to the castle next week.
34: The coach will be leaving the school at 9:10, so you all need to be there at 8:40 and no later.
35: If anyone is late, we will not wait for you.
36: We will be doing all sorts of activities during the day, but don't forget that you will be doing a project on the castle, so you need to bring a book, I mean, a notebook with you.
37: Don't worry about bringing a camera, as on the last trip, two people lost their cameras.
38: You can always use your phones if you want to take pictures.
39: We should arrive at the castle by 9:45.
40: We won't be going on a guided tour because I know how bored you all get.
41: So, instead, we will go to the gardens where we will have a special painting class.
42: The gardens are very beautiful.
43: All your paintings will be exhibited in the school hall next week.
44: After lunch, you can have a look around the castle for an hour, which will be followed by a special treat.
45: No, that doesn't mean you will go and eat cake.
46: We will be going on a boat down the river.
47: I know that this is a trip that you will really enjoy.
48: Now, those projects I mentioned earlier will be marked by Friday afternoon, so they all need to be handed in by Tuesday afternoon.
49: Not Wednesday morning.
50: Us poor teachers have lots to do, so you must hand your projects in on time.
51: If you want more information to help you write your projects, you can look on the castle website, which is www..castle.com.
52: I'll spell that for you.
53: That's a r u n d e l.
54: Okay.
55: You can go to your lessons now.
56: That is the end of part two.

=== PART 3 (type: matching-speakers) ===
1: Part three. You will hear people speaking in different situations.
2: Match each speaker, 15 to 18, to the options, AF.
3: There are two extra options which you do not need to use. Mark your answers on the answer sheet.
4: You now have some time to look at questions.
5: Speaker one.
6: With all my traveling experience, I've got packing down to a fine art now, and it's hardly that big a deal anyway. If you forget something, you just buy it at your destination.
7: But on one recent trip, I was running really late and actually found myself on the coach to the airport, still trying to fit various clothes and papers into my luggage. But the one real kick for me about going to new places, and the thing I'd really recommend, is trying all the stuff that's grown in the region, all the specialties. I've kept a record of them all, and I'm thinking of writing a recipe book.
8: Speaker two.
9: This will probably sound obvious, but if you're like me and leave everything to the last minute, then rolling up your clothes to put them in your bag can be your saving grace. Space is always limited when you're traveling, but this way you can just cram everything in. Even so, this technique didn't help me much on one occasion when I saw this locally made rug, I just knew it would look fabulous at home.
10: Sadly, no one pointed out that it wouldn't be easily transportable, so I ended up paying loads of money to bring it back. I probably could have got just the same thing at home.
11: Speaker three.
12: Nowadays, I travel as much as I can because it's dead easy to tell yourself you're too busy to fit it in. I remember not joining a two-day trek with friends in South America for that reason. Then afterwards, I heard how great it had been, especially the hotel, and kicked myself.
13: Apart from anything, I could have really done with brushing up my Spanish. Anyway, wherever you go, I reckon it's key to remember that despite advances in technology making it theoretically easy to get great bargain price tickets, you can often actually get much better deals elsewhere, for example, just by picking up the phone and talking to a real human being.
14: Speaker four.
15: When you've arrived at the airport, just as the final call is being made for your flight, there's nothing worse than being weighed down by tons of unwanted bits of luggage. My general rule is to take half the stuff I think I'll need and twice the money. It's done me proud so far, and it certainly stood me in good stead when I once got confused over flight booking times and ended up at the airport thinking I was leaving at midnight. When I finally bothered to look, I found my ticket was actually for the previous day. That cost me an extra $500 to sort out, an important lesson.
16: Speaker one.
17: With all my traveling experience, I've got packing down to a fine art now, and it's hardly that big a deal anyway. If you forget something, you just buy it at your destination. But on one recent trip, I was running really late and actually found myself on the coach to the airport, still trying to fit various clothes and papers into my luggage. But the one real kick for me about going to new places, and the thing I'd really recommend, is trying all the stuff that's grown in the region, all the specialties. I've kept a record of them all, and I'm thinking of writing a recipe book.
18: Speaker two.
19: This will probably sound obvious, but if you're like me and leave everything to the last minute, then rolling up your clothes to put them in your bag can be your saving grace. Space is always limited when you're traveling, but this way you can just cram everything in. Even so, this technique didn't help me much on one occasion when I saw this locally made rug, I just knew it would look fabulous at home.
20: Sadly, no one pointed out that it wouldn't be easily transportable, so I ended up paying loads of money to bring it back. I probably could have got just the same thing at home.
21: Speaker three.
22: Nowadays, I travel as much as I can because it's dead easy to tell yourself you're too busy to fit it in. I remember not joining a two-day trek with friends in South America for that reason. Then afterwards, I heard how great it had been, especially the hotel, and kicked myself.
23: Apart from anything, I could have really done with brushing up my Spanish. Anyway, wherever you go, I reckon it's key to remember that despite advances in technology making it theoretically easy to get great bargain price tickets, you can often actually get much better deals elsewhere, for example, just by picking up the phone and talking to a real human being.
24: Speaker four.
25: When you've arrived at the airport, just as the final call is being made for your flight, there's nothing worse than being weighed down by tons of unwanted bits of luggage. My general rule is to take half the stuff I think I'll need and twice the money. It's done me proud so far, and it certainly stood me in good stead when I once got confused over flight booking times and ended up at the airport thinking I was leaving at midnight. When I finally bothered to look, I found my ticket was actually for the previous day. That cost me an extra $500 to sort out, an important lesson.
26: That is the end of the test.

=== PART 4 (type: map-labeling) ===
1: Part four.
2: You will hear someone giving a talk.
3: Label the places, 19-23, on the map, A-H.
4: There are three extra options which you do not need to use.
5: Mark your answers on the answer sheet.
6: You now have some time to look at questions.
7: 
8: Okay.
9: Now, I'll just point out a few places of interest around the gardens.
10: So, can you all look at your maps, please?
11: Okay.
12: So, we're now standing at the main entrance to the gardens, outside the clubhouse.
13: So, you might be interested in our worm farms.
14: This is where we make fertilizer.
15: To get there, from the main entrance, head north.
16: You'll pass gardens on either side of the path.
17: Just before the path curves round to the right, there's a turning on the left.
18: Go down there, and the worm farms are inside the first building you come to.
19: It's also worth visiting our seed store.
20: Again, head north and follow the path as it curves round to the right through the gardens.
21: You'll come to the orchard.
22: Follow the path around the edge of the orchard, but don't go too far.
23: The seed store is actually located inside the orchard, a very pretty spot.
24: Now, the machinery shed might interest some of you.
25: From the main entrance, just go into the car park and walk right to the end.
26: You'll see a little path heading out to the west.
27: It's down there.
28: Our compost heaps are also pretty impressive.
29: So, head north from the main entrance, go past the first gardens, and take the first turning on the left.
30: Go to the end of that path.
31: The compost heaps are built in the shape of a letter U.
32: The drying room is also interesting.
33: This is where we dry fruit to preserve it.
34: To see how it's done, walk up through the gardens till you come to the orchard.
35: Keep heading north, and the drying room is right at the very end of that path, as far as you can go.
36: Now, one other thing I'll mention are the outside toilet facilities.
37: 
38: Now, listen again.
39: 
40: Okay.
41: Now, I'll just point out a few places of interest around the gardens.
42: So, can you all look at your maps, please?
43: Okay.
44: So, we're now standing at the main entrance to the gardens, outside the clubhouse.
45: So, you might be interested in our worm farms.
46: This is where we make fertilizer.
47: To get there, from the main entrance, head north.
48: You'll pass gardens on either side of the path.
49: Just before the path curves round to the right, there's a turning on the left.
50: Go down there, and the worm farms are inside the first building you come to.
51: It's also worth visiting our seed store.
52: Again, head north and follow the path as it curves round to the right through the gardens.
53: You'll come to the orchard.
54: Follow the path around the edge of the orchard, but don't go too far.
55: The seed store is actually located inside the orchard, a very pretty spot.
56: Now, the machinery shed might interest some of you.
57: From the main entrance, just go into the car park and walk right to the end.
58: You'll see a little path heading out to the west.
59: It's down there.
60: Our compost heaps are also pretty impressive.
61: So, head north from the main entrance, go past the first gardens, and take the first turning on the left.
62: Go to the end of that path.
63: The compost heaps are built in the shape of a letter U.
64: The drying room is also interesting.
65: This is where we dry fruit to preserve it.
66: To see how it's done, walk up through the gardens till you come to the orchard.
67: Keep heading north, and the drying room is right at the very end of that path, as far as you can go.
68: Now, one other thing I'll mention are the outside toilet facilities.
69: 
70: That is the end of part four.

=== PART 5 (type: mcq-extracts) ===
1: Narrator: Part five.
2: You will hear three extracts.
3: Choose the correct answer A, B or C for each question, 24 to 29.
4: There are two questions for each extract.
5: Mark your answers on the answer sheet.
6: You now have some time to look at questions.
7: 
8: Narrator: Extract one.
9: You hear two friends discussing a rock concert they both went to.
10: Now look at questions one and two.
11: 
12: Woman: Hi, Tom.
13: So what do you think of the concert?
14: Man: Well, I'm not complaining because at the end of the day I had a pretty good night out, but it's just as well that we got a hefty student discount on the tickets.
15: I went with high hopes of seeing something really spectacular from the headline band, and it just didn't happen.
16: I reckon I was taken in by all the hype.
17: You know, the big build up in the media and everything.
18: I should know better than to take any notice of it, but you just get swept up by it, don't you?
19: Woman: Well, you may, but I don't.
20: I hadn't actually read or heard much about the gig at all, so I didn't go with any preconceptions.
21: If you ask me, you're being rather hard on the main band.
22: I mean, they were way better than the support act.
23: If the idea was to get us in the mood for what was coming later, then I think they should have been presenting us with something a bit more exciting.
24: Man: Well, who knows?
25: Perhaps they were chosen because they wouldn't upstage the stars.
26: 
27: Woman: Hi, Tom.
28: So what do you think of the concert?
29: Man: Well, I'm not complaining because at the end of the day I had a pretty good night out, but it's just as well that we got a hefty student discount on the tickets.
30: I went with high hopes of seeing something really spectacular from the headline band, and it just didn't happen.
31: I reckon I was taken in by all the hype.
32: You know, the big build up in the media and everything.
33: I should know better than to take any notice of it, but you just get swept up by it, don't you?
34: Woman: Well, you may, but I don't.
35: I hadn't actually read or heard much about the gig at all, so I didn't go with any preconceptions.
36: If you ask me, you're being rather hard on the main band.
37: I mean, they were way better than the support act.
38: If the idea was to get us in the mood for what was coming later, then I think they should have been presenting us with something a bit more exciting.
39: Man: Well, who knows?
40: Perhaps they were chosen because they wouldn't upstage the stars.
41: 
42: Narrator: Extract two.
43: You hear part of a sports report about a football club manager.
44: Now look at questions three and four.
45: 
46: Man: There's been lots of speculation in the press this week surrounding the fate of United manager Tony Benson, with some people calling for his resignation after a run of poor results.
47: Talking to people at the club this week, I sense that there may actually be little substance to stories that his job's on the line.
48: Indeed, a number of people I spoke to were keen to defend his record, feeling that he was focusing the players on a more stylish, entertaining brand of football.
49: They thought it would only be a matter of time before we begin to see this reflected in the results.
50: What's your take on all this, Susie?
51: Woman: Well, Gary, the club's invested in promising players.
52: The potential's there.
53: It's just a question of whether Benson's the man to pull it all together and make it work, and time's running out for him.
54: I've been talking to some of the players and I'd say there was a ground swell of support in the dressing room for Benson's general approach.
55: But I think the results speak for themselves.
56: And these days, if a top flight football team isn't getting points, then something's got to change, and that comes back to the manager, because that's his responsibility, getting the results.
57: 
58: Man: There's been lots of speculation in the press this week surrounding the fate of United manager Tony Benson, with some people calling for his resignation after a run of poor results.
59: Talking to people at the club this week, I sense that there may actually be little substance to stories that his job's on the line.
60: Indeed, a number of people I spoke to were keen to defend his record, feeling that he was focusing the players on a more stylish, entertaining brand of football.
61: They thought it would only be a matter of time before we begin to see this reflected in the results.
62: What's your take on all this, Susie?
63: Woman: Well, Gary, the club's invested in promising players.
64: The potential's there.
65: It's just a question of whether Benson's the man to pull it all together and make it work, and time's running out for him.
66: I've been talking to some of the players and I'd say there was a ground swell of support in the dressing room for Benson's general approach.
67: But I think the results speak for themselves.
68: And these days, if a top flight football team isn't getting points, then something's got to change, and that comes back to the manager, because that's his responsibility, getting the results.
69: 
70: Narrator: Extract three.
71: You hear two friends discussing an exhibition of modern sculpture.
72: Now look at questions five and six.
73: 
74: Woman: So what did you think of it?
75: I could stand and look at his work all day long.
76: I know it's a strange thing to say about sculpture, but it really makes you think, you know, about more than just the arts, about aspects of life itself.
77: Man: But this was a strange exhibition.
78: They seem to have gone for quite an eclectic selection.
79: Was it meant to be representative of something?
80: I never read the notes they hand out because I prefer to come to my own interpretation.
81: Woman: Yes, so do I.
82: Actually, I think the unifying theme was the material.
83: I mean, all these pieces were made out of the same three raw materials, wire, glass and straw.
84: Not all his work is, of course, but I guess it's a phase he went through part of his development as an artist.
85: I'd have been happy to have seen some of his other stuff actually.
86: Man: Yeah, more of a range.
87: Well, you can't fault the museum, can you?
88: I mean, any exhibition they put on is worth going to.
89: It's such a brilliant space and you never know how things are going to look because the presentation's so imaginative, isn't it?
90: Woman: There's nowhere quite like it, really.
91: 
92: Woman: So what did you think of it?
93: I could stand and look at his work all day long.
94: I know it's a strange thing to say about sculpture, but it really makes you think, you know, about more than just the art, about aspects of life itself.
95: Man: But this was a strange exhibition.
96: They seem to have gone for quite an eclectic selection.
97: Was it meant to be representative of something?
98: I never read the notes they hand out because I prefer to come to my own interpretation.
99: Woman: Yes, so do I.
100: Actually, I think the unifying theme was the material.
101: I mean, all these pieces were made out of the same three raw materials, wire, glass and straw.
102: Not all his work is, of course, but I guess it's a phase he went through part of his development as an artist.
103: I'd have been happy to have seen some of his other stuff actually.
104: Man: Yeah, more of a range.
105: Well, you can't fault the museum, can you?
106: I mean, any exhibition they put on is worth going to.
107: It's such a brilliant space and you never know how things are going to look because the presentation's so imaginative, isn't it?
108: Woman: There's nowhere quite like it, really.
109: 
110: Narrator: That is the end of part five.

=== PART 6 (type: sentence-completion) ===
1: You'll hear a man called Carl Pittman giving a group of tourists practical advice about learning the sport of surfing.
2: Part six.
3: You will hear a part of a lecture.
4: For each question, fill in the missing information in the numbered space.
5: Write no more than one word for each answer.
6: Mark your answers on the answer sheet.
7: You now have some time to look at questions.
8: Hi, I've come along to tell you about surfing here on the island, something I know many of you want to learn.
9: Now, you can learn to surf anywhere that waves break on a swimmable shoreline.
10: On this island, most of the local population lives around the north coast.
11: We often see waves on it, but you rarely see surfers there.
12: The National Park, on the other hand, has miles of sandy shoreline with plenty of elbow room for beginners to develop their surfing skills.
13: I'd say that was your best choice of venue.
14: Now, surfers need waves, and waves are generated by wind moving across water.
15: The further the wind drags across the water, called fetch, the more powerful the waves, which then spread out and fall into groups we call sets.
16: The distance between waves is measured in seconds and we call that the period.
17: We see just the very top of waves.
18: Most of the energy goes deep into the ocean.
19: The ocean here is not warm, so surfers wear wet suits most of the time.
20: These keep you warm by trapping a thin layer of water against your body, which your body heats.
21: A new suit should almost feel too tight.
22: If the fit of your suit is too loose, then it will hold more water.
23: If you start shivering uncontrollably, then this may be the problem and you should go in and get warm.
24: New materials will stretch out and conform to your body.
25: Make sure you have lots of length in the legs and that you have no folds of material under your arms.
26: It's also important to check that it fits well over your lower back.
27: Rinse your suit thoroughly every time you use it.
28: Use a mild detergent or a wet suit specific soap in warm water to wash your suit, and especially your boots and gloves regularly.
29: Hot water is not recommended for wet suits.
30: And keep your suit on a wide plastic hanger.
31: Metal hangers, especially wire ones, will create creases that will be the first wear out points on your suit, and wooden hangers aren't much better.
32: Creases decrease lifespan.
33: Do not store your suit in direct sunlight.
34: It will lose elasticity and become stiff and brittle before its time.
35: Now, the other thing you'll need is a surfboard.
36: Don't go out and buy a new one straight away.
37: The surfboard you use as an accomplished surfer will be far too fragile to take you through the learning process.
38: The main problem is when beginners hit the board with their knees and put great dents in them.
39: But they also tend to lean surfboards against cars and walls where they can fall over or bump into pointy things when carrying them.
40: So, I'd say always borrow your friend's board to learn on or maybe rent one.
41: Your board will need waxing.
42: Surfers use wax to help them stay on their boards, whereas skaters and snowboarders use it to make their board slide.
43: If you want to clean old wax off, leave your board in the sun for a while, or better still, use a hair dryer and then use a wax comb or plastic scraper.
44: A citrus-based cleaner on a cloth will clean up the rest.
45: Now, before I go on to the next part of my speech.
46: Hi, I've come along to tell you about surfing here on the island, something I know many of you want to learn.
47: Now, you can learn to surf anywhere that waves break on a swimmable shoreline.
48: On this island, most of the local population lives around the north coast.
49: We often see waves on it, but you rarely see surfers there.
50: The National Park, on the other hand, has miles of sandy shoreline with plenty of elbow room for beginners to develop their surfing skills.
51: I'd say that was your best choice of venue.
52: Now, surfers need waves, and waves are generated by wind moving across water.
53: The further the wind drags across the water, called fetch, the more powerful the waves, which then spread out and fall into groups we call sets.
54: The distance between waves is measured in seconds and we call that the period.
55: We see just the very top of waves.
56: Most of the energy goes deep into the ocean.
57: The ocean here is not warm, so surfers wear wet suits most of the time.
58: These keep you warm by trapping a thin layer of water against your body, which your body heats.
59: A new suit should almost feel too tight.
60: If the fit of your suit is too loose, then it will hold more water.
61: If you start shivering uncontrollably, then this may be the problem and you should go in and get warm.
62: New materials will stretch out and conform to your body.
63: Make sure you have lots of length in the legs and that you have no folds of material under your arms.
64: It's also important to check that it fits well over your lower back.
65: Rinse your suit thoroughly every time you use it.
66: Use a mild detergent or a wet suit specific soap in warm water to wash your suit, and especially your boots and gloves regularly.
67: Hot water is not recommended for wet suits.
68: And keep your suit on a wide.
69: Plastic hanger.
70: Metal hangers, especially wire ones, will create creases that will be the first wear out points on your suit, and wooden hangers aren't much better.
71: Creases decrease lifespan.
72: Do not store your suit in direct sunlight.
73: It will lose elasticity and become stiff and brittle before its time.
74: Now, the other thing you'll need is a surfboard.
75: Don't go out and buy a new one straight away.
76: The surfboard you use as an accomplished surfer will be far too fragile to take you through the learning process.
77: The main problem is when beginners hit the board with their knees and put great dents in them.
78: But they also tend to lean surfboards against cars and walls where they can fall over or bump into pointy things when carrying them.
79: So, I'd say always borrow your friend's board to learn on, or maybe rent one.
80: Your board will need waxing.
81: Surfers use wax to help them stay on their boards, whereas skaters and snowboarders use it to make their board slide.
82: If you want to clean old wax off, leave your board in the sun for a while, or better still, use a hair dryer and then use a wax comb or plastic scraper.
83: A citrus-based cleaner on a cloth will clean up the rest.
84: Now, before I go on to the next part of my speech.
85: That is the end of part six.

