
=== PART 1 (type: mcq-reply) ===
1: Part one. You will hear some sentences. You will hear each sentence twice. Choose the correct reply to each sentence, A, B or C. Mark your answers on the answer sheet. You now have some time to look at questions.
2: Speaker one. How was your weekend? How was your weekend?
3: Speaker two. I'm really stressed about this project deadline. I'm really stressed about this project deadline.
4: Speaker three. They have finally accepted my application. They have finally accepted my application.
5: Speaker four. What's your favorite pet? What's your favorite pet?
6: Speaker five. The weather is so unpredictable lately. The weather is so unpredictable lately.
7: Speaker six. I don't understand this concept at all. I don't understand this concept at all.
8: Speaker seven. I don't understand this concept at all. I don't understand this concept at all.
9: Speaker eight. I'm thinking of redecorating the living room. I'm thinking of redecorating the living room.
10: That is the end of part one.

=== PART 2 (type: gap-fill-form) ===
1: Narrator: Part two. You will hear someone giving a talk. For each question, fill in the missing information in the numbered space. Write one word or a number for each answer. You now have some time to look at questions.
2: Narrator: You will hear a student called Andrianna giving a presentation to her class about her father's job.
3: Andrianna: Hi everyone. I have chosen to tell you about my father's job for the project we had for today. I chose the first project which focuses on jobs. I found the other topic on the environment a bit difficult.
4: My father is a pilot for an international airline company. He's been flying people around the world for the last 16 years and he loves his job. After he graduated from university, he became a teacher. He taught in a primary school and he really enjoyed it. However, he'd always had a dream that one day he would fly, so he decided to go for an important career change and train as a pilot.
5: He will never forget the first flight when he was responsible for a plane with 80 happy holiday makers on their way to Italy. Six more people were working on the plane. He was very nervous. Everything went well though and he was so pleased when his first flight was behind him. He often gets nervous, people asking him questions about how dangerous flying really is.
6: He tells them that it is the safest way to travel. However, sometimes unexpected things happen during a flight, such as bad weather or difficult passengers. But he says that the most important thing a pilot can do is to always stay calm. My father believes that what nervous passengers have in common is that they need to be in control of their life, and when they get on a plane, they have to give up that control. He always does his best to make passengers feel relaxed on the flight. Once he has taken off and he is cruising in the sky, he always has a coffee to make him feel extra awake and ready for anything.
7: Narrator: Now, listen again.
8: Andrianna: Hi everyone. I have chosen to tell you about my father's job for the project we had for today. I chose the first project which focuses on jobs. I found the other topic on the environment a bit difficult.
9: My father is a pilot for an international airline company. He's been flying people around the world for the last 16 years and he loves his job. After he graduated from university, he became a teacher. He taught in a primary school and he really enjoyed it. However, he'd always had a dream that one day he would fly, so he decided to go for an important career change and train as a pilot.
10: He will never forget the first flight when he was responsible for a plane with 80 happy holiday makers on their way to Italy. Six more people were working on the plane. He was very nervous. Everything went well though and he was so pleased when his first flight was behind him.
11: He often gets nervous, people asking him questions about how dangerous flying really is. He tells them that it is the safest way to travel. However, sometimes unexpected things happen during a flight, such as bad weather or difficult passengers. But he says that the most important thing a pilot can do is to always stay calm. My father believes that what nervous passengers have in common is that they need to be in control of their life, and when they get on a plane, they have to give up that control.
12: He always does his best to make passengers feel relaxed on the flight. Once he has taken off and he is cruising in the sky, he always has a coffee to make him feel extra awake and ready for anything.
13: Narrator: That is the end of part two.

=== PART 3 (type: matching-speakers) ===
1: Narrator: Part three.
2: You'll hear five short extracts in which people are talking about how they gave up office jobs to do other types of work.
3: Choose from the list A to H what made each speaker decide to give up office work.
4: You have 45 seconds to look at part four.
5: Speaker 1: I just drifted into office work, having no particular qualifications to speak of.
6: I didn't mind that it was 9 to 5 or that we were always chasing impossible deadlines.
7: I mean, that's what kept the people in our section on our toes.
8: No, the thing I couldn't stand was all the sitting about in front of a screen.
9: Even though I went to the gym at lunchtime, I still never really felt fit.
10: Gardening certainly put that right.
11: I'm outside in all weathers, but I love it, and although the money's nothing to write home about, I really feel that people who employ me are grateful.
12: That's worth a lot to me.
13: Speaker 2: The trouble with our office wasn't so much the lack of space.
14: I could put up with that.
15: It was the sort of people you had to work with.
16: I mean, sitting in front of a screen for six hours at a stretch, you needed a bit of light relief, but nobody there could see the funny side of my anecdotes, I'm afraid.
17: I'm much happier in hairdressing.
18: I chat all day, and you never know who's going to come in next.
19: My boss is a real laugh, and I feel that I'm really expressing my creativity when I suggest a new style to a client, even if it doesn't always work out as I intended.
20: Speaker 3: People think I went into nursing because I wanted a more caring job, but that wasn't the real reason.
21: Sure, it's nice helping people, but we used to do that in our office too.
22: No, it was having to do everything by yesterday that got me down.
23: We were always in a rush because the bosses couldn't get the scheduling right.
24: Although the hours are a bit irregular, I'm actually a bit better off as a nurse.
25: So it's a real win-win situation for me because I had been expecting a cut in my standard of living.
26: I'm calmer and feel more in control of my life, and in a year's time I'll be fully qualified.
27: Speaker 4: I went into office work because I had good IT skills.
28: I thought it was a good career move.
29: It never occurred to me that I'd find it stressful just being there.
30: I mean, the hours weren't that long, but we were all packed into this really small area.
31: It was quite well paid, but it just wasn't worth it.
32: As a window dresser for a big store, I know that what I do will be seen by lots of people, and could have a big impact.
33: That makes me determined to do it as well as I can.
34: I love that feeling, and there's no grumpy boss breathing down my neck all the time either.
35: 
36: Speaker 1: I just drifted into office work, having no particular qualifications to speak of.
37: I didn't mind that it was 9 to 5 or that we were always chasing impossible deadlines.
38: I mean, that's what kept the people in our section on our toes.
39: No, the thing I couldn't stand was all the sitting about in front of a screen.
40: Even though I went to the gym at lunchtime, I still never really felt fit.
41: Gardening certainly put that right.
42: I'm outside in all weathers, but I love it, and although the money's nothing to write home about, I really feel that people who employ me are grateful.
43: That's worth a lot to me.
44: Speaker 2: The trouble with our office wasn't so much the lack of space.
45: I could put up with that.
46: It was the sort of people you had to work with.
47: I mean, sitting in front of a screen for six hours at a stretch, you needed a bit of light relief, but nobody there could see the funny side of my anecdotes, I'm afraid.
48: I'm much happier in hairdressing.
49: I chat all day, and you never know who's going to come in next.
50: My boss is a real laugh, and I feel that I'm really expressing my creativity when I suggest a new style to a client, even if it doesn't always work out as I intended.
51: Speaker 3: People think I went into nursing because I wanted a more caring job, but that wasn't the real reason.
52: Sure, it's nice helping people, but we used to do that in our office too.
53: No, it was having to do everything by yesterday that got me down.
54: We were always in a rush because the bosses couldn't get the scheduling right.
55: Although the hours are a bit irregular, I'm actually a bit better off as a nurse.
56: So it's a real win-win situation for me because I had been expecting a cut in my standard of living.
57: I'm calmer and feel more in control of my life, and in a year's time I'll be fully qualified.
58: Speaker 4: I went into office work because I had good IT skills.
59: I thought it was a good career move.
60: It never occurred to me that I'd find it stressful just being there.
61: I mean, the hours weren't that long, but we were all packed into this really small area.
62: It was quite well paid, but it just wasn't worth it.
63: As a window dresser for a big store, I know that what I do will be seen by lots of people, and could have a big impact.
64: That makes me determined to do it as well as I can.
65: I love that feeling, and there's no grumpy boss breathing down my neck all the time either.
66: Narrator: That is the end of the test.

=== PART 4 (type: map-labeling) ===
1: Part four.
2: You will hear someone giving a talk.
3: Label the places 19 to 23 on the map AH.
4: There are three extra options which you do not need to use.
5: Mark your answers on the answer sheet.
6: You now have some time to look at questions.
7: Okay, so if you take out your maps, I'll just point out a few places you might like to visit.
8: So right now, we're standing in the ticket office at the bottom of your maps.
9: So, one place I'd recommend is the old bakery.
10: This is a typical bakery from this area from about 100 years ago.
11: To get there from the ticket office, walk up Staford Street and then turn into rugby road.
12: Walk down rugby road.
13: There are a few interesting places along the way and the old bakery is right next to the canal.
14: Another interesting place is the doctor surgery.
15: This was moved here brick by brick and rebuilt on the museum site.
16: Walk up Staford Street until you reach the dock.
17: You see the cafe.
18: Walk past that and the doctor surgery is just there.
19: Copa's cottage is also fascinating.
20: A worker's cottage from the 19th century.
21: Walk up Staford Street and take the first turning on the left.
22: The road curves round to the west, then south as it climbs Jack's Hill.
23: You'll pass a few little houses on the way up and Copa's cottage is right on the summit of Jack's Hill.
24: The stables are also great.
25: This is where they kept all the horses.
26: Again, walk up Staford Street to the dock and turn right.
27: Walk round the dock till you get to the canal.
28: Then cross the bridge over the canal to reach the stables.
29: Also, be sure to visit the old school.
30: So, walk northeast up through the museum and it's not too far.
31: The old school is right on the corner of Staford Street and rugby road.
32: Now, one other thing that I need to mention.
33: Now, listen again.
34: Okay, so if you take out your maps, I'll just point out a few places you might like to visit.
35: So right now, we're standing in the ticket office at the bottom of your maps.
36: So, one place I'd recommend is the old bakery.
37: This is a typical bakery from this area from about 100 years ago.
38: To get there from the ticket office, walk up Staford Street and then turn into rugby road.
39: Walk down rugby road.
40: There are a few interesting places along the way and the old bakery is right next to the canal.
41: Another interesting place is the doctor surgery.
42: This was moved here brick by brick and rebuilt on the museum site.
43: Walk up Staford Street until you reach the dock.
44: You see the cafe.
45: Walk past that and the doctor surgery is just there.
46: Copa's cottage is also fascinating.
47: A worker's cottage from the 19th century.
48: Walk up Staford Street and take the first turning on the left.
49: The road curves round to the west, then south as it climbs Jack's Hill.
50: You'll pass a few little houses on the way up and Copa's cottage is right on the summit of Jack's Hill.
51: The stables are also great.
52: This is where they kept all the horses.
53: Again, walk up Staford Street to the dock and turn right.
54: Walk round the dock till you get to the canal.
55: Then cross the bridge over the canal to reach the stables.
56: Also, be sure to visit the old school.
57: So, walk northeast up through the museum and it's not too far.
58: The old school is right on the corner of Staford Street and rugby road.
59: Now, one other thing that I need to mention.
60: That is the end of part four.

=== PART 5 (type: mcq-extracts) ===
1: Narrator: Part five. You will hear three extracts. Choose the correct answer, A, B or C, for each question, 24 to 29. There are two questions for each extract. Mark your answers on the answer sheet.
2: You now have some time to look at questions.
3: 
4: Narrator: Extract one. You hear two people talking about their work as website designers. Now look at questions one and two.
5: 
6: Man: As a kid, I was always messing around on computers, so I ended up doing a degree in computer science. Though strictly speaking it isn't necessary for this job, it did mean I could walk straight into it. What companies want is people who can come up with ideas. I get a buzz from that side of it, even when it's hard. It's a fluid working environment, so hours aren't fixed and can be long in relation to the salary. I generally like to work on my own, but a web designer can't produce stuff in a vacuum because by its very nature, it's a collaborative effort.
7: Woman: Oh, I didn't go the university route, but worked part-time with different companies and made loads of contacts who've come in handy. Got my foot in the door, so to speak. Then I got a full-time job offer that got me on the ladder. It wasn't easy and considering what you put in, the job's not the big earner that people assume it is. Well, at least not at the beginning. I supplement it by writing reviews of other people's sites, but I enjoy the flexibility. I like working with other people and that's key.
8: 
9: Man: As a kid, I was always messing around on computers, so I ended up doing a degree in computer science. Though strictly speaking it isn't necessary for this job, it did mean I could walk straight into it. What companies want is people who can come up with ideas. I get a buzz from that side of it, even when it's hard. It's a fluid working environment, so hours aren't fixed and can be long in relation to the salary. I generally like to work on my own, but a web designer can't produce stuff in a vacuum because by its very nature, it's a collaborative effort.
10: Woman: Oh, I didn't go the university route, but worked part-time with different companies and made loads of contacts who've come in handy. Got my foot in the door, so to speak. Then I got a full-time job offer that got me on the ladder. It wasn't easy and considering what you put in, the job's not the big earner that people assume it is. Well, at least not at the beginning. I supplement it by writing reviews of other people's sites, but I enjoy the flexibility. I like working with other people and that's key.
11: 
12: Narrator: Extract two. You hear two cyclists talking about their sport.
13: Now look at questions three and four.
14: 
15: Woman: How long have you been cycling then?
16: Man: I started road cycling when I was six and got hooked immediately. I'd practice sprinting between two street lights over and over. I've always been competitive and I work harder than anyone else. If I don't win, I need to know why. I copy the person who beat me. I won't stop till I'm better than them. The stiff competition in the cycling world is what drives me. You've been to the Velodrome, haven't you?
17: Woman: Yeah, the track itself is amazing. Such a steep angle and the bikes have no breaks. If you stop pedaling, it stops. Although I'm not such an experienced cyclist as you, I jumped at the chance to try it and wow, from the position of the start line, that steep slope looks like a mountain. I was told the faster you go, the safer you are, so I pedaled like mad and managed one lap. I kept going and started to enjoy it. So much so, I forgot to pedal and immediately fell off.
18: Man: So you'll be going back.
19: Woman: You try stopping me.
20: 
21: Woman: How long have you been cycling then?
22: Man: I started road cycling when I was six and got hooked immediately. I'd practice sprinting between two street lights over and over. I've always been competitive and I work harder than anyone else. If I don't win, I need to know why. I copy the person who beat me. I won't stop till I'm better than them. The stiff competition in the cycling world is what drives me. You've been to the Velodrome, haven't you?
23: Woman: Yeah, the track itself is amazing. Such a steep angle and the bikes have no breaks. If you stop pedaling, it stops. Although I'm not such an experienced cyclist as you, I jumped at the chance to try it and wow, from the position of the start line, that steep slope looks like a mountain. I was told the faster you go, the safer you are, so I pedaled like mad and managed one lap. I kept going and started to enjoy it. So much so, I forgot to pedal and immediately fell off.
24: Man: So you'll be going back.
25: Woman: You try stopping me.
26: 
27: Narrator: Extract three. You hear a man called Roy talking about bees on a phone-in program.
28: Now look at questions five and six.
29: 
30: Woman: So, Roy, what do you want to talk about on the program today?
31: Man: I want to talk about bees. Bees are a vital part of our ecosystem. They're friendly creatures and they're declining in numbers. For what it's worth, my own experience is much like that of other callers who've reported near normal numbers of bumblebees, but virtually no honeybees. I think there's a distinct lack of wasps too. I must admit I'm at a loss to know why, though I've read interesting articles about the domestication of bees and poor practices of modern beekeepers. But it seems clear that we can't discount what others see as the number one culprit, the overuse of chemicals by gardeners.
32: Woman: So, what do you suggest gardeners do, Roy?
33: Man: Well, the best thing anyone, lucky enough to have a garden can do is provide a bee-friendly area. And the good news is bees prefer lazy gardeners, which I suspect is most of us. A wild garden providing a natural habitat is the way forward. Choose what you plant carefully. It doesn't have to be hard work, but it could make a big difference. And buy your honey from local suppliers you know and trust.
34: 
35: Woman: So, Roy, what do you want to talk about on the program today?
36: Man: I want to talk about bees. Bees are a vital part of our ecosystem. They're friendly creatures and they're declining in numbers. For what it's worth, my own experience is much like that of other callers who've reported near normal numbers of bumblebees, but virtually no honeybees. I think there's a distinct lack of wasps too. I must admit I'm at a loss to know why, though I've read interesting articles about the domestication of bees and poor practices of modern beekeepers. But it seems clear that we can't discount what others see as the number one culprit, the overuse of chemicals by gardeners.
37: Woman: So, what do you suggest gardeners do, Roy?
38: Man: Well, the best thing anyone, lucky enough to have a garden can do is provide a bee-friendly area. And the good news is bees prefer lazy gardeners, which I suspect is most of us. A wild garden providing a natural habitat is the way forward. Choose what you plant carefully. It doesn't have to be hard work, but it could make a big difference. And buy your honey from local suppliers you know and trust.
39: 
40: Narrator: That is the end of part five.

=== PART 6 (type: sentence-completion) ===
1: Part six.
2: You'll hear a student called Tim Farnham giving a class presentation about a seabird called the Albatross.
3: Complete the sentences with a word or short phrase.
4: You now have some time to look at questions.
5: Hi, my name's Tim, and the topic of my presentation is a seabird called the Albatross.
6: It's the largest seabird, and it's always been a great favorite with sailors.
7: It's also well known because it features in a famous English poem.
8: The word Albatross came into the English language via the Portuguese word Alcatraz, that was used for similar birds called Gannets.
9: The famous American prison island was also named after them, but the real origin of the word is thought to be Arabic, where it means diver.
10: There's lots of different species of Albatross, and scientists are always arguing about exactly how many.
11: Over the years, estimates have varied from 13 to as many as 80.
12: Nowadays, a figure of 21 is widely accepted with 19 of those identified as being in danger of extinction.
13: The Albatross is mostly found in the southern hemisphere, and there's none in the North Atlantic.
14: The bird travels long distances in search of its food, fish and squid mostly, and depends on the wind to a great extent.
15: That's why you rarely find them in tropical areas, where long periods of calm are common.
16: The Albatross manages to cover such long distances by conserving energy.
17: Apart from take off and landing, it rarely flaps its huge wings, and actually there's a locking mechanism in its shoulder that keeps the wings in place as it glides through the air.
18: As you'd expect, the bird's got good eyesight and will swoop down when it sees signs of food near the surface of the water.
19: What I didn't expect to find, however, was that it can also detect the smell of its food.
20: This explains why it follows fishing boats that use dead fish as bait.
21: Indeed, one of the reasons the Albatross is such an endangered bird is that it tends to get caught up in fishing nets.
22: Another reason the Albatross faces extinction is it takes a long time to reproduce.
23: The bird can live for 60 years and only starts breeding from the age of five.
24: Even then, each pair of birds only produces one egg per year.
25: They build nests on remote, uninhabited islands, because animals like rats, which arrive at the same time as humans, will eat the eggs, and predictably, cats will kill the chicks.
26: Apparently even little mice can be a problem at nest sites, which is incredible.
27: And of course, the Albatross has always been killed by people.
28: Sailors used to eat them and at one time their feathers were highly valued, which was actually the main reason.
29: Even the bird's bones were used in certain ceremonies by local populations, though that wasn't on a big scale.
30: These days, plastic is the biggest enemy and there's tons of it in the sea.
31: Eating plastic doesn't in itself kill an Albatross, but it tends to stay in the stomach and so cut down the amount of food the bird can digest, which then weakens it.
32: Some dead birds have even been found with weird things like plastic cigarette lighters and toy soldiers in their stomachs, as well as the all too common bottle caps.
33: There must be a way of stopping those getting into the sea.
34: Anyway, before I go on to talk about the next.
35: Hi, my name's Tim, and the topic of my presentation is a seabird called the Albatross.
36: It's the largest seabird and it's always been a great favorite with sailors.
37: It's also well known because it features in a famous English poem.
38: The word Albatross came into the English language via the Portuguese word Alcatraz, that was used for similar birds called Gannets.
39: The famous American prison island was also named after them, but the real origin of the word is thought to be Arabic, where it means diver.
40: There's lots of different species of Albatross and scientists are always arguing about exactly how many.
41: Over the years, estimates have varied from 13 to as many as 80.
42: Nowadays, a figure of 21 is widely accepted with 19 of those identified as being in danger of extinction.
43: The Albatross is mostly found in the southern hemisphere and there's none in the North Atlantic.
44: The bird travels long distances in search of its food, fish and squid mostly, and depends on the wind to a great extent.
45: That's why you rarely find them in tropical areas where long periods of calm are common.
46: The Albatross manages to cover such long distances by conserving energy.
47: Apart from take off and landing, it rarely flaps its huge wings and actually there's a locking mechanism in its shoulder that keeps the wings in place as it glides through the air.
48: As you'd expect, the bird's got good eyesight and will swoop down when it sees signs of food near the surface of the water.
49: What I didn't expect to find, however, was that it can also detect the smell of its food.
50: This explains why it follows fishing boats that use dead fish as bait.
51: Indeed, one of the reasons the Albatross is such an endangered bird is that it tends to get caught up in fishing nets.
52: Another reason the Albatross faces extinction is it takes a long time to reproduce.
53: The bird can live for 60 years and only starts breeding from the age of five.
54: Even then, each pair of birds only produces one egg per year.
55: They build nests on remote, uninhabited islands because animals like rats, which arrive at the same time as humans, will eat the eggs and predictably cats will kill the chicks.
56: Apparently, even little mice can be a problem at nest sites, which is incredible.
57: And, of course, the Albatross has always been killed by people.
58: Sailors used to eat them and at one time their feathers were highly valued, which was actually the main reason.
59: Even the bird's bones were used in certain ceremonies by local populations, though that wasn't on a big scale.
60: These days, plastic is the biggest enemy and there's tons of it in the sea.
61: Eating plastic doesn't in itself kill an Albatross, but it tends to stay in the stomach and so cut down the amount of food the bird can digest, which then weakens it.
62: Some dead birds have even been found with weird things like plastic cigarette lighters and toy soldiers in their stomachs, as well as the all too common bottle caps.
63: There must be a way of stopping those getting into the sea.
64: Anyway, before I go on to talk about the next.
65: That is the end of Part six.
