=== PART 1 (type: mcq-reply) ===
1: Part one.
2: You will hear some sentences.
3: You will hear each sentence twice.
4: Choose the correct reply to each sentence, A, B, or C.
5: Mark your answers on the answer sheet.
6: 
7: Speaker one. Giselle, what have you done so far?
8: 
9: Giselle, what have you done so far?
10: 
11: Speaker two. Shall I go shopping or buy it online?
12: 
13: Shall I go shopping or buy it online?
14: 
15: Speaker three. Welcome to our house museum.
16: 
17: Welcome to our house museum.
18: 
19: Speaker four. What do you think of the new PUBG update?
20: 
21: What do you think of the new PUBG update?
22: 
23: Speaker five. Why did you leave your last hometown?
24: 
25: Why did you leave your last hometown?
26: 
27: Speaker six. Can you get me there faster?
28: 
29: Can you get me there faster?
30: 
31: Speaker seven. I am going hunting with Joseph in Alaska.
32: 
33: I am going hunting with Joseph in Alaska.
34: 
35: Speaker eight. I will be moving into a new house in a few days.
36: 
37: I will be moving into a new house in a few days.
38: 
39: Now, listen again.
40: That is the end of part one.

=== PART 2 (type: gap-fill-form) ===
1: Part two.
2: You will hear someone giving a talk.
3: For each question, fill in the missing information in the numbered space.
4: Write one word or a number for each answer.
5: You now have some time to look at questions.
6: You will hear a film actor called Roger talking on the school radio about his typical day on a film set.
7: Hi everyone.
8: Today, I will tell you about my typical day filming.
9: It sounds like a great job, but it really is very tiring.
10: Every day, I get up at 4:00 in the morning, and I have to be ready by 4:30 to get in the car to the studio.
11: In the winter, it's still dark, and as the studio is only half an hour away, I'm there at 5:00, and I don't yet a chance to have a quick sleep.
12: As soon as I get to the studio, I go to the hairdresser who brushes my hair into the hairstyle of the character I am playing.
13: This usually takes about half an hour.
14: When she finishes doing my hair, I don't have to move from the chair because the makeup lady comes to me and prepares me for filming.
15: At the moment, I'm playing a police officer.
16: So I don't need a lot of makeup.
17: In my last film, I played the part of a big monster, and I needed a lot of makeup, which took 5 hours to do.
18: It wasn't comfortable sitting in the same chair for such a long time.
19: After makeup, I am given my costume to put on.
20: At this point, I am now ready to act, but it is never like that.
21: The film director is either late or the engineers haven't finished with the scenery or lights.
22: We don't usually start on time.
23: When they are ready, I go into the studio and we act out the different scenes.
24: This takes all day until about 5:00 p.m. when they remove my makeup and I get changed back into my normal clothes.
25: A car then takes me home, where I have dinner and go to bed, usually about 10:00 p.m.
26: Then, the same happens the next day and every day during filming, and that's my typical day.
27: Now listen again.
28: Hi everyone.
29: Today, I will tell you about my typical day filming.
30: It sounds like a great job, but it really is very tiring.
31: Every day, I get up at 4:00 in the morning, and I have to be ready by 4:30 to get in the car to the studio.
32: In the winter, it's still dark, and as the studio is only half an hour away, I'm there at 5:00, and I don't yet a chance to have a quick sleep.
33: As soon as I get to the studio, I go to the hairdresser who brushes my hair into the hairstyle of the character I am playing.
34: This usually takes about half an hour.
35: When she finishes doing my hair, I don't have to move from the chair because the makeup lady comes to me and prepares me for filming.
36: At the moment, I'm playing a police officer, so I don't need a lot of makeup.
37: In my last film, I played the part of a big monster, and I needed a lot of makeup, which took 5 hours to do.
38: It wasn't comfortable sitting in the same chair for such a long time.
39: After makeup, I am given my costume to put on.
40: At this point, I am now ready to act, but it is never like that.
41: The film director is either late or the engineers haven't finished with the scenery or lights.
42: We don't usually start on time.
43: When they are ready, I go into the studio and we act out the different scenes.
44: This takes all day until about 5:00 p.m. when they remove my makeup and I get changed back into my normal clothes.
45: A car then takes me home, where I have dinner and go to bed, usually about 10:00 p.m.
46: Then, the same happens the next day and every day during filming, and that's my typical day.
47: That is the end of part two.

=== PART 3 (type: matching-speakers) ===
1: Part three.
2: You will hear people speaking in different situations.
3: Match each speaker, 15 to 18, to the options, AF.
4: There are two extra options, which you do not need to use.
5: Mark your answers on the answer sheet.
6: You now have some time to look at questions.
7: Speaker one.
8: I'm studying journalism at university, so when the chance of a summer job at Wow magazine came up, I jumped at it.
9: It was unpaid, but it was totally worth the effort.
10: I learned more about the trade in six weeks on the magazine than I did in two years at college.
11: I did a lot of overtime.
12: I was exhausted by the end of the day, but I was keen, so I didn't mind.
13: In fact, it's vital to go the extra mile.
14: It gets you noticed and makes it more likely that you'll be offered a job when you finally graduated.
15: Speaker two.
16: I think to make it in the magazine business, you have to be a certain type of person.
17: I mean, I'm quite sociable, which is fine, but I'm not what you call pushy.
18: I'll do what's asked of me, whether it's checking computer records or even working extra hours, because I don't want to cause a fuss.
19: But the people I met in the office were all very driven.
20: They knew what they wanted and would go to any lengths to get their way.
21: I think that's essential in journalism, and this realization has kind of put me off it, frankly.
22: It's not really me.
23: Time to explore other options.
24: Speaker three.
25: I was surprised to get a temporary job at Country House Magazine.
26: The staff weren't at all as I'd expected.
27: Everyone was so friendly and welcoming.
28: That was a relief because I'm quite shy and get nervous when I meet new people.
29: I did mostly administrative work.
30: I'm good at that sort of thing.
31: I can apply myself to any task, so I made a good impression.
32: The editor told me she liked people with focus.
33: They make the best journalists.
34: And I met some interesting people who promised to help me find work when I finally graduate, if I decide to go into journalism, so that was nice.
35: Speaker four.
36: A friend of my uncle got me a job on the magazine.
37: It wasn't badly paid and the hours were decent.
38: The thing was though, everyone seemed so fussy and obsessed with little things.
39: Like they'd go mad if I got a date wrong or misspelled someone's name.
40: I guess that kind of nit-picking is a must for journalists though, especially with an online magazine.
41: Anyway, my worry was, I knew I wasn't really much of a team player.
42: I preferred to do my own thing.
43: But I was prepared to put that to one side and try and knuckle down and take orders, which produced good results.
44: Now, listen again.
45: Speaker one.
46: I'm studying journalism at university, so when the chance of a summer job at Wow magazine came up, I jumped at it.
47: It was unpaid, but it was totally worth the effort.
48: I learned more about the trade in six weeks on the magazine than I did in two years at college.
49: I did a lot of overtime.
50: I was exhausted by the end of the day, but I was keen, so I didn't mind.
51: In fact, it's vital to go the extra mile.
52: It gets you noticed and makes it more likely that you'll be offered a job when you finally graduated.
53: Speaker two.
54: I think to make it in the magazine business, you have to be a certain type of person.
55: I mean, I'm quite sociable, which is fine, but I'm not what you call pushy.
56: I'll do what's asked of me, whether it's checking computer records or even working extra hours, because I don't want to cause a fuss.
57: But the people I met in the office were all very driven.
58: They knew what they wanted and would go to any lengths to get their way.
59: I think that's essential in journalism, and this realization has kind of put me off it, frankly.
60: It's not really me.
61: Time to explore other options.
62: Speaker three.
63: I was surprised to get a temporary job at Country House Magazine.
64: The staff weren't at all as I'd expected.
65: Everyone was so friendly and welcoming.
66: That was a relief because I'm quite shy and get nervous when I meet new people.
67: I did mostly administrative work.
68: I'm good at that sort of thing.
69: I can apply myself to any task, so I made a good impression.
70: The editor told me she liked people with focus.
71: They make the best journalists.
72: And I met some interesting people who promised to help me find work when I finally graduate, if I decide to go into journalism, so that was nice.
73: Speaker four.
74: A friend of my uncle got me a job on the magazine.
75: It wasn't badly paid and the hours were decent.
76: The thing was though, everyone seemed so fussy and obsessed with little things.
77: Like they'd go mad if I got a date wrong or misspelled someone's name.
78: I guess that kind of nit-picking is a must for journalists though, especially with an online magazine.
79: Anyway, my worry was, I knew I wasn't really much of a team player.
80: I preferred to do my own thing.
81: But I was prepared to put that to one side and try and knuckle down and take orders, which produced good results.
82: That is the end of part three.

=== PART 4 (type: map-labeling) ===
1: Part four.
2: You will hear someone giving a talk.
3: Label the places, 19 to 23, on the map AH.
4: There are three extra options which you do not need to use.
5: Mark your answers on the answer sheet.
6: You now have some time to look at questions.
7: Once again, we'll hold the Village Fate in Riverside Park.
8: You've all got a copy of the map of the park.
9: Let's take a moment to explain the key locations for the Fate.
10: Entering from the car park, you'll take the path to the left, leading towards the Memorial Gardens.
11: Before you reach the gardens, you'll come to the raffle.
12: This will allow us to sell a lot of raffle tickets.
13: Going on from the raffle, directly across from the Memorial Gardens, is where we'll have the jam tasting.
14: Our local jam makers have agreed to donate 10% of their sales at the fate, so that will help us reach our goal.
15: Moving on from the jam tasting, as you come to the river, you'll find the face painting.
16: We expect every child under the age of 10 to get their faces painted, but this activity is for children only.
17: On the other side of the park, past the pond, we'll set up the band straight right on the edge of the river.
18: Several great local bands have agreed to perform for free, so we'll have great tunes throughout the day.
19: Next to the band stand, heading back towards the car park, we'll have the drink stand.
20: This will be right next to the kid's games, so we'll be able to sell drinks to those enjoying the music, and any parents and little ones who work up a thirst at the games.
21: Again, all the kids games are only for children.
22: The exception is the egg and spoon race, which will be repeated at intervals throughout the day, so everyone can compete.
23: The races will take place between the kids games and the car park.
24: Unfortunately, we've had to discontinue the three-legged race for legal reasons.
25: There were far too many injuries last year.
26: That's why we're letting adults join in the egg and spoon race.
27: It's ┬г2 per person, so we expect that will really help us hit our goal.
28: In terms of the kids games, there are quite a few.
29: The balloon burst, the chocolate throw, and of course, the always popular ladder game, where players throw bean bags in between the rungs of a ladder laid out on the ground.
30: At last year's fate, the chocolate throw was the best liked and most played of the kids games, and we expect it to be the same again this year.
31: The kids throw penny, and it must land and stay on a chocolate bar.
32: If it does, they win the chocolate.
33: It's harder than it sounds.
34: Last year, we charged 50 p per throw, and we made ┬г400 from that game alone.
35: Now, listen again.
36: Once again, we'll hold the Village Fate in Riverside Park.
37: You've all got a copy of the map of the park.
38: Let's take a moment to explain the key locations for the Fate.
39: Entering from the car park, you'll take the path to the left, leading towards the Memorial Gardens.
40: Before you reach the gardens, you'll come to the raffle.
41: This will allow us to sell a lot of raffle tickets.
42: Going on from the raffle, directly across from the Memorial Gardens, is where we'll have the jam tasting.
43: Our local jam makers have agreed to donate 10% of their sales at the fate, so that will help us reach our goal.
44: Moving on from the jam tasting, as you come to the river, you'll find the face painting.
45: We expect every child under the age of 10 to get their faces painted, but this activity is for children only.
46: On the other side of the park, past the pond, we'll set up the band straight right on the edge of the river.
47: Several great local bands have agreed to perform for free, so we'll have great tunes throughout the day.
48: Next to the band stand, heading back towards the car park, we'll have the drink stand.
49: This will be right next to the kid's games, so we'll be able to sell drinks to those enjoying the music, and any parents and little ones who work up a thirst at the games.
50: Again, all the kids games are only for children.
51: The exception is the egg and spoon race, which will be repeated at intervals throughout the day, so everyone can compete.
52: The races will take place between the kids games and the car park.
53: Unfortunately, we've had to discontinue the three-legged race for legal reasons.
54: There were far too many injuries last year.
55: That's why we're letting adults join in the egg and spoon race.
56: It's ┬г2 per person, so we expect that will really help us hit our goal.
57: In terms of the kids games, there are quite a few.
58: The balloon burst, the chocolate throw, and of course, the always popular ladder game, where players throw bean bags in between the rungs of a ladder laid out on the ground.
59: At last year's fate, the chocolate throw was the best liked and most played of the kids games, and we expect it to be the same again this year.
60: The kids throw penny, and it must land and stay on a chocolate bar.
61: If it does, they win the chocolate.
62: It's harder than it sounds.
63: Last year, we charged 50 p per throw, and we made ┬г400 from that game alone.
64: That is the end of part four.

=== PART 5 (type: mcq-extracts) ===
1: Part five.
2: You will hear three extracts.
3: Choose the correct answer, A, B, or C, for each question, 24 to 29.
4: There are two questions for each extract.
5: Mark your answers on the answer sheet.
6: You now have some time to look at questions.
7: Extract one.
8: You hear two friends talking about online privacy.
9: Now look at questions one and two.
10: You know, I think privacy as we used to understand it is a thing of the past.
11: Why do you say that?
12: Not another scare story in the papers.
13: They're always full of fanciful tales of doom and gloom.
14: You may laugh, but after what happened yesterday.
15: What did happen?
16: I was discussing the whole issue with an uncle of mine, who's just turned 85.
17: He proudly informed me that there couldn't be any data relating to him on the internet because he'd never used a computer.
18: Well, fair enough, surely.
19: Well, I only spent a couple of minutes searching and was still able to come up with quite a bit of stuff about him.
20: Really?
21: That's a bit worrying.
22: I bet he was taken aback, wasn't he?
23: He was stunned, speechless.
24: Asked me to remove it all from cyberspace, but it doesn't work like that, of course.
25: What's there is there.
26: That does seem an erosion of privacy.
27: Mind you, come to think of it, I suppose there's also been some information available on us all for a while, way before the days of the internet.
28: But it wasn't so easy to get at, and the situation is not going to improve.
29: No, I guess not.
30: Quite the opposite.
31: You know, I think privacy as we used to understand it is a thing of the past.
32: Why do you say that?
33: Not another scare story in the papers.
34: They're always full of fanciful tales of doom and gloom.
35: You may laugh, but after what happened yesterday.
36: What did happen?
37: I was discussing the whole issue with an uncle of mine, who's just turned 85.
38: He proudly informed me that there couldn't be any data relating to him on the internet because he'd never used a computer.
39: Well, fair enough, surely.
40: Well, I only spent a couple of minutes searching and was still able to come up with quite a bit of stuff about him.
41: Really?
42: That's a bit worrying.
43: I bet he was taken aback, wasn't he?
44: He was stunned, speechless.
45: Asked me to remove it all from cyberspace, but it doesn't work like that, of course.
46: What's there is there.
47: That does seem an erosion of privacy.
48: Mind you, come to think of it, I suppose there's also been some information available on us all for a while, way before the days of the internet.
49: But it wasn't so easy to get at, and the situation is not going to improve.
50: No, I guess not.
51: Quite the opposite.
52: Extract two.
53: You hear two trainee chefs discussing the issue of food waste.
54: Now look at questions three and four.
55: Did you know that over 7 million tons of food is thrown away every year in the UK?
56: Really?
57: That's one big garbage mountain.
58: Yeah, and it costs huge amounts to collect, not to mention clogging landfills and producing vast amounts of CO2 emissions.
59: There's not much we can do about it though, is there?
60: Well, actually, restaurants are some of the worst offenders.
61: That's why we adopted responsible practices in our kitchen a while back.
62: We've only got one garbage bin now, despite having a hundred seats, but two compost machines for food waste.
63: Oh, come on.
64: We've got four or five bins and only 60 seats at our place.
65: Look, anything is possible.
66: Our place is unrecognizable from what it was like last year, as is my boss.
67: Can't think what's got into him, thinking ahead for a change.
68: Okay, maybe I'd better talk to my head chef.
69: Might be fighting an uphill battle though.
70: There are other things you can do too.
71: My chef's obsessive about portion control, keeping an eye on how much food customers leave and altering dishes accordingly.
72: Don't you get complaints about small servings?
73: Granted, we don't do enormous portions, but if occasionally someone wants a little bit more, we'll give it to them.
74: It works, honest.
75: , don't suppose we'd go far down that road.
76: Did you know that over 7 million tons of food is thrown away every year in the UK?
77: Really?
78: That's one big garbage mountain.
79: Yeah, and it costs huge amounts to collect, not to mention clogging landfills and producing vast amounts of CO2 emissions.
80: There's not much we can do about it though, is there?
81: Well, actually, restaurants are some of the worst offenders.
82: That's why we adopted responsible practices in our kitchen a while back.
83: We've only got one garbage bin now, despite having a hundred seats, but two compost machines for food waste.
84: Oh, come on.
85: We've got four or five bins and only 60 seats at our place.
86: Look, anything is possible.
87: Our place is unrecognizable from what it was like last year, as is my boss.
88: Can't think what's got into him, thinking ahead for a change.
89: Okay, maybe I'd better talk to my head chef.
90: Might be fighting an uphill battle though.
91: There are other things you can do too.
92: My chef's obsessive about portion control, keeping an eye on how much food customers leave and altering dishes accordingly.
93: Don't you get complaints about small servings?
94: Granted, we don't do enormous portions, but if occasionally someone wants a little bit more, we'll give it to them.
95: It works, honest.
96: don't suppose we'd go far down that road.
97: Extract three.
98: You hear two students talking about an experiment into the way people perceive time.
99: Now look at questions five and six.
100: Do you know anything about that experiment the lecturer was referring to?
101: I've looked it up.
102: It involved this Frenchman spending two months in a cave under a glacier in 1962, I think it was.
103: He was 100 meters below ground, and because he had nothing to track the time, no clock, obviously, no sun either, he got disorientated.
104: When he came back up, he thought he'd been down there for just 34 days.
105: Very revealing for the researchers who'd anticipated it would go the other way.
106: Various stuntmen and entertainers have done similar things to push themselves to extremes, but then, of course, they've always got an eye on the headlines they'll create.
107: That's fascinating.
108: Yes.
109: It's all about temporal landmarks.
110: They're really important.
111: If you build more of them into your life, you'll experience time differently.
112: Days and years won't be one undifferentiated mush.
113: Temporal landmarks help stop the feeling that time's whizzing by.
114: I bet, for example, you retain memories of events that happen near the beginning or end of term.
115: They're kind of landmarks, better than those that happen somewhere in between.
116: So?
117: So, establish a few landmarks.
118: Remember to mark special events like birthdays properly with some sort of celebration.
119: That's advice I'm happy to follow.
120: Do you know anything about that experiment the lecturer was referring to?
121: I've looked it up.
122: It involved this Frenchman spending two months in a cave under a glacier in 1962, I think it was.
123: He was 100 meters below ground, and because he had nothing to track the time, no clock, obviously, no sun either, he got disorientated.
124: When he came back up, he thought he'd been down there for just 34 days.
125: Very revealing for the researchers who'd anticipated it would go the other way.
126: Various stuntmen and entertainers have done similar things to push themselves to extremes, but then, of course, they've always got an eye on the headlines they'll create.
127: That's fascinating.
128: Yes.
129: It's all about temporal landmarks.
130: They're really important.
131: If you build more of them into your life, you'll experience time differently.
132: Days and years won't be one undifferentiated mush.
133: Temporal landmarks help stop the feeling that time's whizzing by.
134: I bet, for example, you retain memories of events that happen near the beginning or end of term.
135: They're kind of landmarks, better than those that happen somewhere in between.
136: So?
137: So, establish a few landmarks.
138: Remember to mark special events like birthdays properly with some sort of celebration.
139: That's advice I'm happy to follow.
140: That is the end of part five.

=== PART 6 (type: sentence-completion) ===
1: Part six.
2: You will hear a part of a lecture.
3: For each question, fill in the missing information in the numbered space.
4: Write no more than one word for each answer.
5: Mark your answers on the answer sheet.
6: You now have some time to look at questions.
7: Welcome to my talk about my work to protect the oceans from the growing problem of pollution.
8: I think many people are unaware of just how serious this is and the consequences it has for marine life.
9: My interest started when I was working as a volunteer on a beach cleanup project called Cleaner Coasts, and was introduced to my current boss.
10: He persuaded me to come and work full-time for the environmental group he'd just established under the name Water Response, and I've never regretted my decision.
11: I soon found myself face-to-face with the direct consequences of ocean pollution, as my job involves helping to save seabirds who've swallowed the litter found floating on ocean surfaces, mistaking it for food.
12: There is such a wide range of garbage entering the oceans now, and we rescue birds that have consumed everything from plastic bags to balloons and even light bulbs on occasion, would you believe?
13: Uh, things like plastic bottle tops are common finds, unfortunately, too.
14: Another aspect of my work is removing as much of this debris from the coast as possible.
15: Uh, plastics are particularly dangerous for marine creatures as they contain what are known as organic pollutants.
16: This is because plastics draw in a high concentration of damaging poisons, acting like a sort of chemical sponge.
17: This is really bad news, you see.
18: These chemicals affect not only a seabird's digestive system, which is to be expected, but what was news to me was that they also damage its reproductive system.
19: I was well aware that toxins are also notoriously harmful to the immune system, making it harder for many marine species to fight disease.
20: Another problem with plastic is its durability.
21: It doesn't go away like natural materials do, but just goes from being, say, a floating bottle to tiny plastic particles, attractive to marine creatures.
22: This results from the action of sunlight, but wave action also plays a part in the fragmentation process.
23: Unfortunately, ocean pollution is increasing, despite various international conventions set up to control it.
24: Around 100 million tons of plastic are produced annually, of which a shocking 10 million tons end up in the sea.
25: The majority of this gets there from land sources, although marine sources are actually responsible for dumping as much as 3.5 million tons of plastic each year.
26: As well as removing debris and caring for marine animals, I'm also involved in raising public awareness of the problem.
27: I help run educational projects, teaching people how to make small changes in their daily lives, like avoiding chemical-based detergents, which can get into waterways and eventually find their way into the sea.
28: I encourage others to try simple ingredients, such as lemon juice for various household chores instead of their regular cleaning product.
29: This can be remarkably effective.
30: Even things like keeping cars well maintained is essential for ocean protection because oil leaks get washed down drains and end up causing more pollution than the car tires you see abandoned on beaches.
31: Irresponsible though tire dumping is, we've at least got a chance of stopping the tires from getting into the sea.
32: Well, I want to show you a video now of our staff.
33: Now, listen again.
34: Welcome to my talk about my work to protect the oceans from the growing problem of pollution.
35: I think many people are unaware of just how serious this is and the consequences it has for marine life.
36: My interest started when I was working as a volunteer on a beach cleanup project called Cleaner Coasts, and was introduced to my current boss.
37: He persuaded me to come and work full-time for the environmental group he'd just established under the name Water Response, and I've never regretted my decision.
38: I soon found myself face-to-face with the direct consequences of ocean pollution, as my job involves helping to save seabirds who've swallowed the litter found floating on ocean surfaces, mistaking it for food.
39: There is such a wide range of garbage entering the oceans now, and we rescue birds that have consumed everything from plastic bags to balloons and even light bulbs on occasion, would you believe?
40: Uh, things like plastic bottle tops are common finds, unfortunately, too.
41: Another aspect of my work is removing as much of this debris from the coast as possible.
42: Uh, plastics are particularly dangerous for marine creatures as they contain what are known as organic pollutants.
43: This is because plastics draw in a high concentration of damaging poisons, acting like a sort of chemical sponge.
44: This is really bad news, you see.
45: These chemicals affect not only a seabird's digestive system, which is to be expected, but what was news to me was that they also damage its reproductive system.
46: I was well aware that toxins are also notoriously harmful to the immune system, making it harder for many marine species to fight disease.
47: Another problem with plastic is its durability.
48: It doesn't go away like natural materials do, but just goes from being, say, a floating bottle to tiny plastic particles, attractive to marine creatures.
49: This results from the action of sunlight, but wave action also plays a part in the fragmentation process.
50: Unfortunately, ocean pollution is increasing, despite various international conventions set up to control it.
51: Around 100 million tons of plastic are produced annually, of which a shocking 10 million tons end up in the sea.
52: The majority of this gets there from land sources, although marine sources are actually responsible for dumping as much as 3.5 million tons of plastic each year.
53: As well as removing debris and caring for marine animals, I'm also involved in raising public awareness of the problem.
54: I help run educational projects, teaching people how to make small changes in their daily lives, like avoiding chemical-based detergents, which can get into waterways and eventually find their way into the sea.
55: I encourage others to try simple ingredients, such as lemon juice for various household chores instead of their regular cleaning product.
56: This can be remarkably effective.
57: Even things like keeping cars well maintained is essential for ocean protection because oil leaks get washed down drains and end up causing more pollution than the car tires you see abandoned on beaches.
58: Irresponsible though tire dumping is, we've at least got a chance of stopping the tires from getting into the sea.
59: Well, I want to show you a video now of our staff.
60: That is the end of part six.

