
=== PART 1 (type: mcq-reply) ===
1: part one. You will hear some sentences.
2: You will hear each sentence twice.
3: Choose the correct reply to each sentence, A, B or C.
4: Mark your answers on the answer sheet.
5: You now have some time to look at questions.
6: 
7: Speaker one.
8: Jane, would you like to have dinner with me?
9: Jane, would you like to have dinner with me?
10: 
11: Speaker two.
12: I'm sorry, I can't remember you.
13: I'm sorry, I can't remember you.
14: 
15: Speaker three.
16: How is your day going?
17: How is your day going?
18: 
19: Speaker four.
20: What do you think about that email I sent?
21: What do you think about that email I sent?
22: 
23: Speaker five.
24: What do you think about that email I sent?
25: What do you think about that email I sent?
26: 
27: Speaker six.
28: Can I see that shirt on the top shelf, please?
29: Can I see that shirt on the top shelf, please?
30: 
31: Speaker seven.
32: How long are you going to stay here?
33: How long are you going to stay here?
34: 
35: Speaker eight.
36: I'm going to buy some papers.
37: I'm going to buy some papers.
38: 
39: That is the end of part one.

=== PART 2 (type: gap-fill-form) ===
1: Narrator: Part two. You will hear someone giving a talk. For each question, fill in the missing information in the numbered space. Write one word or a number for each answer. You now have some time to look at questions.
2: Speaker: You will hear a radio presenter talking about a sports festival.
3: Are you wondering what to do over the summer holidays? The International sports Festival starts on the 30th of June, lasts for two weeks and ends on the 13th of July with prize giving and fireworks.
4: It's well worth attending. Here's why.
5: The fun starts on day one with a huge event in Prospect Park. Organizers will arrive early to set up, but the event for the public begins at 12:00 p.m. and lasts all day until 6:00. Throughout the day, many different clubs and companies will be giving free workshops, which means you'll be able to try sports that you may never have tried before.
6: Some of the highlights at the opening event include skateboarding and break dancing workshops. You might also like to bring your bike and try some extreme cycling. Before you start, an expert will check over your bike to make sure it's safe. There will also be a bike race.
7: To find out more information about exact times of each workshop, look on our website. You'll also be able to download a map which shows where everything will be in the park on the day. For the remaining two weeks of the festival, you'll be able to enjoy further workshops and sessions in the area. Locations and events include water sports at River swimming complex, track events at the Athletics Stadium, and you can also take part in indoor team games at Central leisure.
8: This festival is the first of its kind in our town, and I really recommend you see what it's all about.
9: Narrator: Now, listen again.
10: Speaker: Are you wondering what to do over the summer holidays? The International Sports Festival starts on the 30th of June, lasts for two weeks and ends on the 13th of July with prize giving and fireworks. It's well worth attending. Here's why.
11: The fun starts on day one with a huge event in Prospect Park. Organizers will arrive early to set up, but the event for the public begins at 12:00 p.m. and lasts all day until 6. Throughout the day, many different clubs and companies will be giving free workshops, which means you'll be able to try sports that you may never have tried before.
12: Some of the highlights at the opening event include skateboarding and break dancing workshops. You might also like to bring your bike and try some extreme cycling. Before you start, an expert will check over your bike to make sure it's safe. There will also be a bike race.
13: To find out more information about exact times of each workshop, look on our website. You'll also be able to download a map which shows where everything will be in the park on the day. For the remaining two weeks of the festival, you'll be able to enjoy further workshops and sessions in the area. Locations and events include water sports at River swimming complex, track events at the Athletics stadium, and you can also take part in indoor team games at Central leisure.
14: This festival is the first of its kind in our town, and I really recommend you see what it's all about.
15: Narrator: That is the end of part two.

=== PART 3 (type: matching-speakers) ===
1: Part three.
2: You will hear people speaking in different situations.
3: Match each speaker, 15 to 18 to the options, A to F.
4: There are two extra options which you do not need to use.
5: Mark your answers on the answer sheet.
6: You now have some time to look at questions.
7: 
8: Speaker one.
9: In common with most of my colleagues on the track, I'm training in the morning most of the time, as well as throughout the day.
10: And sometimes we have to compete in the mornings too, as early as seven or eight in some places in the world.
11: And people say to me, and you really eat before that?
12: But if you think about it, you absolutely can't perform to the best of your abilities without fueling your body, or your mind for that matter.
13: So, the message for kids who've got their sights set on gold is, don't skip your breakfast before you train.
14: 
15: Speaker two.
16: I have to admit that I was one of those awful people who used to tell others to do something that I didn't do myself.
17: It wasn't until I was invited to present a report on a conference in the USA, and I was skeptical before that too, that I came back a convert.
18: There's good research to show that people are healthier if they eat breakfast, and everything I heard was quite convincing, and I've gone on to use quite a lot of it in my column, you know.
19: I read up the research and did a few pieces on it myself, which were quite well received, even by the professionals.
20: 
21: Speaker three.
22: Well, I read that the latest thinking is that whatever you eat in the morning, your metabolic rate goes up slightly. So the rate you burn calories goes up too.
23: Even if you sit about a lot like me, if you've had a good breakfast, you still won't necessarily put on weight.
24: Sounds crazy.
25: But just think, if you don't eat first thing, you get a rumbly tummy about mid morning. And what happens next? Well, what I do is rush out to the vending machine after I've pulled into the next station and grab something quick, which is usually chocolate or crisps, you know, something full of fat and sugar.
26: So, I suppose those newspaper articles are right really, aren't they?
27: 
28: Speaker four.
29: I'll be absolutely honest with you.
30: I usually wake up and don't feel particularly hungry, but especially when you've got an early start and you can't be absolutely sure where the next meal is coming from, I mean it could be breakfast, lunch or dinner, depending on where your next stop over is and what time it is there. And during all that time you might have served all manner of meals too. So you have to think ahead and I generally make sure I have something breakfast-like before each shift, even if it's not morning, and then I don't get hunger pangs in the cabin.
31: 
32: Now you'll hear the recording again.
33: Speaker one.
34: In common with most of my colleagues on the track, I'm training in the morning most of the time, as well as throughout the day.
35: And sometimes we have to compete in the mornings too, as early as seven or eight in some places in the world.
36: And people say to me, and you really eat before that?
37: But if you think about it, you absolutely can't perform to the best of your abilities without fueling your body, or your mind for that matter.
38: So, the message for kids who've got their sights set on gold is, don't skip your breakfast before you train.
39: 
40: Speaker two.
41: I have to admit that I was one of those awful people who used to tell others to do something that I didn't do myself.
42: It wasn't until I was invited to present a report on a conference in the USA, and I was skeptical before that too, that I came back a convert.
43: There's good research to show that people are healthier if they eat breakfast, and everything I heard was quite convincing, and I've gone on to use quite a lot of it in my column, you know.
44: I read up the research and did a few pieces on it myself, which were quite well received, even by the professionals.
45: 
46: Speaker three.
47: Well, I read that the latest thinking is that whatever you eat in the morning, your metabolic rate goes up slightly. So the rate you burn calories goes up too.
48: Even if you sit about a lot like me, if you've had a good breakfast, you still won't necessarily put on weight.
49: Sounds crazy.
50: But just think, if you don't eat first thing, you get a rumbly tummy about mid morning. And what happens next? Well, what I do is rush out to the vending machine after I've pulled into the next station and grab something quick, which is usually chocolate or crisps, you know, something full of fat and sugar.
51: So, I suppose those newspaper articles are right really, aren't they?
52: 
53: Speaker four.
54: I'll be absolutely honest with you.
55: I usually wake up and don't feel particularly hungry, but especially when you've got an early start and you can't be absolutely sure where the next meal is coming from, I mean it could be breakfast, lunch or dinner, depending on where your next stop over is and what time it is there. And during all that time you might have served all manner of meals too. So you have to think ahead and I generally make sure I have something breakfast-like before each shift, even if it's not morning, and then I don't get hunger pangs in the cabin.

=== PART 4 (type: map-labeling) ===
1: Narrator: Part four.
2: You will hear someone giving a talk.
3: Label the places, 19 to 23 on the map, AH.
4: There are three extra options which you do not need to use.
5: Mark your answers on the answer sheet.
6: You now have some time to look at questions.
7: 
8: Now, if you can take a look at your plans, you'll see Bradley Castle has four towers joined together by a high wall with a river on two sides.
9: Don't miss seeing the great hall.
10: That's near the river in the main tower, the biggest one, which was extended and redesigned in the 18th century.
11: If you want to get a good view of the whole castle, you can walk around the walls.
12: The starting point's quite near the main entrance.
13: Walk straight down the path until you get to the South gate, and it's just there.
14: Don't go onto the North gate.
15: There's no way up from there.
16: There'll shortly be a show in which you can see archers displaying their skill with a bow and arrow.
17: The quickest way to get there is to take the first left after the main entrance and follow the path past the bridge.
18: Then you'll see it in front of you at the end.
19: If you like animals, there's also a display of hunting birds, Falcons and Eagles, and so on.
20: If you go from the main entrance in the direction of the South gate, but turn right before you get there, instead of going through it, you'll see it on your right, past the first tower.
21: At 3:00 p.m., there's a short performance of traditional dancing on the outdoor stage.
22: That's right at the other side of the castle from the entrance and over the bridge.
23: It's about 10 minutes walk or so.
24: And finally, the shop.
25: It's actually inside one of the towers, but the way in is from the outside.
26: Just take the first left after the main entrance, go down the path and take the first right.
27: It's got some lovely gifts and souvenirs.
28: Right.
29: So we're just arriving.
30: 
31: Narrator: Now, listen again.
32: 
33: Now, if you can take a look at your plans, you'll see Bradley Castle has four towers joined together by a high wall with a river on two sides.
34: Don't miss seeing the great hall.
35: That's near the river in the main tower, the biggest one, which was extended and redesigned in the 18th century.
36: If you want to get a good view of the whole castle, you can walk around the walls.
37: The starting point's quite near the main entrance.
38: Walk straight down the path until you get to the South gate, and it's just there.
39: Don't go onto the North gate.
40: There's no way up from there.
41: There'll shortly be a show in which you can see archers displaying their skill with a bow and arrow.
42: The quickest way to get there is to take the first left after the main entrance and follow the path past the bridge.
43: Then you'll see it in front of you at the end.
44: If you like animals, there's also a display of hunting birds, Falcons and Eagles, and so on.
45: If you go from the main entrance in the direction of the South gate, but turn right before you get there, instead of going through it, you'll see it on your right, past the first tower.
46: At 3:00 p.m., there's a short performance of traditional dancing on the outdoor stage.
47: That's right at the other side of the castle from the entrance and over the bridge.
48: It's about 10 minutes walk or so.
49: And finally, the shop.
50: It's actually inside one of the towers, but the way in is from the outside.
51: Just take the first left after the main entrance, go down the path and take the first right.
52: It's got some lovely gifts and souvenirs.
53: Right.
54: So we're just arriving.
55: 
56: Narrator: That is the end of part four.

=== PART 5 (type: mcq-extracts) ===
1: Part five. You will hear three extracts.
2: Choose the correct answer, A, B or C, for each question, 24 to 29.
3: There are two questions for each extract.
4: Mark your answers on the answer sheet.
5: Extract one. You over hear a man telling a friend about a trip to the theater.
6: Now look at questions one and two.
7: 
8: So, did you go to that play in the end?
9: I did, and it was an interesting experience.
10: Really?
11: Why's that?
12: Well, for a start, the theater was in Pellam Street.
13: Now, I've walked up and down that street many times, but I never realized there was a theater there.
14: No, nor did I.
15: Has it always been there?
16: Apparently.
17: Anyway, it took a bit of finding.
18: You go through a doorway, down a passage, you know the sort of place.
19: And when you do get inside, it's really surprisingly intimate.
20: I shouldn't think it holds more than about 40 people.
21: And the play?
22: Well, the show was a big success up in London last year, huge audiences, but unfortunately only a handful of people turned up for last night's performance.
23: I'm not surprised though.
24: It was rather amateurish.
25: They could have done with using at least a bit of makeup and learning their parts better.
26: They just about managed to cover up their mistakes by really throwing themselves into their characters.
27: Yes, I know what you mean.
28: 
29: Now you'll hear the recording again.
30: So, did you go to that play in the end?
31: I did, and it was an interesting experience.
32: Really?
33: Why's that?
34: Well, for a start, the theater was in Pellam Street.
35: Now, I've walked up and down that street many times, but I never realized there was a theater there.
36: No, nor did I.
37: Has it always been there?
38: Apparently.
39: Anyway, it took a bit of finding.
40: You go through a doorway, down a passage, you know the sort of place.
41: And when you do get inside, it's really surprisingly intimate.
42: I shouldn't think it holds more than about 40 people.
43: And the play?
44: Well, the show was a big success up in London last year, huge audiences, but unfortunately only a handful of people turned up for last night's performance.
45: I'm not surprised though.
46: It was rather amateurish.
47: They could have done with using at least a bit of makeup and learning their parts better.
48: They just about managed to cover up their mistakes by really throwing themselves into their characters.
49: Yes, I know what you mean.
50: 
51: Extract two. You hear a media interview with a tour operator at a conference on what is called responsible tourism.
52: Now look at questions three and four.
53: 
54: Excuse me, sir, could you spare a couple of minutes before the conference to answer some questions?
55: Well, if you could make it really brief.
56: You're always identified with responsible tourism.
57: How do you feel it's different from normal tourism?
58: Our trips have unique themes including culinary, spa, angling, indigenous peoples, plus those specially designed for groups with special needs, but it's the tour organization that really differentiates them from others.
59: Uh take the Himalayas.
60: several of our outdoor staff work only six months of the season, but are well-paid all year round.
61: Then we always use solar-powered equipment and make our environmental commitment known to every tourist.
62: Do you believe people are willing to pay more for your kind of tourism?
63: Not in the main, but I think they will be once the thinking is revolutionized.
64: they just become aware of the global consequences of the choices they make.
65: Then I think they'll see that the future of the world depends on justice in commerce and industry and they'll dig deep in their pockets.
66: I must rush now, but come to my session.
67: 
68: Now you'll hear the recording again.
69: Excuse me, sir, could you spare a couple of minutes before the conference to answer some questions?
70: Well, if you could make it really brief.
71: You're always identified with responsible tourism.
72: How do you feel it's different from normal tourism?
73: Our trips have unique themes including culinary, spa, angling, indigenous peoples, plus those specially designed for groups with special needs, but it's the tour organization that really differentiates them from others.
74: Uh take the Himalayas.
75: several of our outdoor staff work only six months of the season, but are well-paid all year round.
76: Then we always use solar-powered equipment and make our environmental commitment known to every tourist.
77: Do you believe people are willing to pay more for your kind of tourism?
78: Not in the main, but I think they will be once the thinking is revolutionized.
79: they just become aware of the global consequences of the choices they make.
80: Then I think they'll see that the future of the world depends on justice in commerce and industry and they'll dig deep in their pockets.
81: I must rush now, but come to my session.
82: 
83: Extract three. You hear two local radio presenters, Laura and Steve, talking about a forthcoming rugby match.
84: Now look at questions five and six.
85: 
86: So, Steve, what about next week's all-important match in Melbourne?
87: Australia versus Wales.
88: The teams are pretty evenly matched, aren't they?
89: Australia are certainly the favorites, but whether they'll pull it off and by what margin is anybody's guess.
90: A real cliffhanger probably, and there's huge interest in this match, but I understand the Welsh supporters haven't been allowed enough tickets.
91: As usual, the authorities have given priority to the home fans, but that seems eminently reasonable to me.
92: There's concern, isn't there, about two of the Welsh players who are currently recovering from injuries?
93: Yes, and there's still doubt about whether they'll play.
94: But even if they don't, I reckon it'll be a gripping match to watch.
95: And to anybody listening who's lucky enough to have tickets, Melbourne's filling up with school groups and junior teams because the Australians are very keen to encourage their youngsters to take up rugby.
96: So better make sure you book somewhere to stay right now.
97: And of course, you could consider becoming a member of the Welsh team's fan club, although it's a bit late to take advantage of their cheap flight deals.
98: Well, thanks for that, Steve.
99: 
100: Now you'll hear the recording again.
101: So, Steve, what about next week's all-important match in Melbourne?
102: Australia versus Wales.
103: The teams are pretty evenly matched, aren't they?
104: Australia are certainly the favorites, but whether they'll pull it off and by what margin is anybody's guess.
105: A real cliffhanger probably, and there's huge interest in this match, but I understand the Welsh supporters haven't been allowed enough tickets.
106: As usual, the authorities have given priority to the home fans, but that seems eminently reasonable to me.
107: There's concern, isn't there, about two of the Welsh players who are currently recovering from injuries?
108: Yes, and there's still doubt about whether they'll play.
109: But even if they don't, I reckon it'll be a gripping match to watch.
110: And to anybody listening who's lucky enough to have tickets, Melbourne's filling up with school groups and junior teams because the Australians are very keen to encourage their youngsters to take up rugby.
111: So better make sure you book somewhere to stay right now.
112: And of course, you could consider becoming a member of the Welsh team's fan club, although it's a bit late to take advantage of their cheap flight deals.
113: Well, thanks for that, Steve.
114: 
115: That is the end of part five.

=== PART 6 (type: sentence-completion) ===
1: Part six.
2: Narrator: You will hear a woman called Kate Asadi talking to a group of people interested in taking up skydiving.
3: Complete the sentences.
4: You now have 45 seconds to look at part two.
5: (Music)
6: Narrator: Hello.
7: Kate Asadi: I'm Kate Asadi and I'm here to talk about my hobby, which is skydiving.
8: So, why do people want to jump out of a plane?
9: In the UK, this is still seen as something done by crazy young people.
10: But in the USA, skydiving is a hobby that has been taken up by people from all age groups, by anyone looking for excitement, from 20-year-olds to people enjoying an active retirement.
11: I wanted to do skydiving as a teenager, but my parents weren't very keen on the idea and wouldn't give their permission.
12: So, my first jump was as a university student, when I was able to get a discount.
13: Immediately, I was hooked.
14: I couldn't afford to do it regularly, though, until I started working as a lawyer.
15: Why do I do it?
16: Well, skydiving makes you feel great.
17: You forget all your problems.
18: There aren't really any health benefits, although I know several business executives with stressful jobs who do skydiving to help them relax.
19: Of course, some people start skydiving to help them get over a fear of heights.
20: If they can face up to their fear and jump out of a plane at a height of 3,000m, it helps them to build up the confidence to tackle other things.
21: So, how do you start?
22: The equipment for skydiving is specialized and not easy to get in local sports shops.
23: Nowadays, most people buy skydiving kit from websites.
24: There's more choice and you can see photographs.
25: Though when you're buying second-hand on the internet, you should ask to see the equipment first.
26: I got my skydiving camera that way, and last week I got a helmet with a 50% discount.
27: You need a good helmet, by the way.
28: It's the most important part of your equipment.
29: For your first skydive, you jump from a height of over 3,000m, strapped to an instructor who's required to have done at least 2,000 jumps before.
30: You dive down in free fall for 30 seconds, and when the parachute opens, you float down sedately, landing very gently.
31: After that, most people can't wait to have another go.
32: Still nervous?
33: Don't worry.
34: All trainee skydivers must wear an appliance known as the automatic parachute.
35: It's compulsory.
36: So, even if you black out, your parachute will still open on its own.
37: These rules are for safety reasons.
38: So, what's stopping you?
39: If you're interested, you need to get in touch with the Parachute Association, and you'll find the contact details through your local airport.
40: They'll give advice on how to get started.
41: You can learn to skydive over a weekend, but I suggest the best way is to do it over several months.
42: That allows you to build up your confidence gradually.
43: Skydiving's great.
44: It'll give you a whole new outlook on life.
45: (Music)
46: Narrator: Now you'll hear the recording again.
47: Kate Asadi: Hello.
48: I'm Kate Asadi and I'm here to talk about my hobby, which is skydiving.
49: So, why do people want to jump out of a plane?
50: In the UK, this is still seen as something done by crazy young people.
51: But in the USA, skydiving is a hobby that has been taken up by people from all age groups, by anyone looking for excitement, from 20-year-olds to people enjoying an active retirement.
52: I wanted to do skydiving as a teenager, but my parents weren't very keen on the idea and wouldn't give their permission.
53: So, my first jump was as a university student, when I was able to get a discount.
54: Immediately, I was hooked.
55: I couldn't afford to do it regularly, though, until I started working as a lawyer.
56: Why do I do it?
57: Well, skydiving makes you feel great.
58: You forget all your problems.
59: There aren't really any health benefits, although I know several business executives with stressful jobs who do skydiving to help them relax.
60: Of course, some people start skydiving to help them get over a fear of heights.
61: If they can face up to their fear and jump out of a plane at a height of 3,000m, it helps them to build up the confidence to tackle other things.
62: So, how do you start?
63: The equipment for skydiving is specialized and not easy to get in local sports shops.
64: Nowadays, most people buy skydiving kit from websites.
65: There's more choice and you can see photographs.
66: Though when you're buying second-hand on the internet, you should ask to see the equipment first.
67: I got my skydiving camera that way, and last week I got a helmet with a 50% discount.
68: You need a good helmet, by the way.
69: It's the most important part of your equipment.
70: For your first skydive, you jump from a height of over 3,000m, strapped to an instructor who's required to have done at least 2,000 jumps before.
71: You dive down in free fall for 30 seconds, and when the parachute opens, you float down sedately, landing very gently.
72: After that, most people can't wait to have another go.
73: Still nervous?
74: Don't worry.
75: All trainee skydivers must wear an appliance known as the automatic parachute.
76: It's compulsory.
77: So, even if you black out, your parachute will still open on its own.
78: These rules are for safety reasons.
79: So, what's stopping you?
80: If you're interested, you need to get in touch with the Parachute Association, and you'll find the contact details through your local airport.
81: They'll give advice on how to get started.
82: You can learn to skydive over a weekend, but I suggest the best way is to do it over several months.
83: That allows you to build up your confidence gradually.
84: Skydiving's great.
85: It'll give you a whole new outlook on life.
86: Narrator: That is the end of part six.
