=== PART 1 (type: mcq-reply) ===
1: Part one. You will hear some sentences.
2: You will hear each sentence twice.
3: Choose the correct reply to each sentence, A, B, or C.
4: Mark your answers on the answer sheet.
5: Speaker one. The party starts at 8 o'clock and don't be late.
6: The party starts at 8 o'clock and don't be late.
7: Speaker two. I was thinking we could get a bite to eat and catch a movie.
8: I was thinking we could get a bite to eat and catch a movie.
9: Speaker three. Have you checked the connections on your computer?
10: Have you checked the connections on your computer?
11: Speaker four. Today's my wife's birthday and I need some flowers.
12: Today's my wife's birthday and I need some flowers.
13: Speaker five. Where do they grow mangoes?
14: Where do they grow mangoes?
15: Speaker six. What's the price of this ultra high definition TV?
16: What's the price of this ultra high definition TV?
17: Speaker seven. We have a 50% discount to all the radios on sale today.
18: We have a 50% discount to all the radios on sale today.
19: Speaker eight. I'm really glad that you came to see me.
20: I'm really glad that you came to see me.
21: Now, listen again.
22: That is the end of part one.

=== PART 2 (type: gap-fill-form) ===
1: Part two.
2: You will hear someone giving a talk.
3: For each question, fill in the missing information in the numbered space.
4: Write one word or a number for each answer.
5: For each question, write the correct answer in the gap.
6: Write one or two words or a number or a date or a time.
7: You have 20 seconds.
8: You will hear a man called Jack Pindar talking to a group of students about his job as a radio presenter.
9: 
10: Good morning.
11: Thanks for inviting me to come and talk to you all today.
12: I have been a radio presenter for 10 years now.
13: I started doing DJ work for the University Radio station.
14: Strangely, I wasn't studying music or art.
15: In fact, I was a history student, but I've always loved music.
16: I do the breakfast show Monday to Friday.
17: I start at 6:00 a.m. and I'm not much of a breakfast person, so I don't eat before the show.
18: Everyone eats and drinks loads of strong coffee, but I'm a tea man myself.
19: One big cup, and then I'm ready to start.
20: Once I finish the show at 10:00, I have my breakfast then and a glass of juice.
21: I love my job because I get to play great music.
22: The best thing of all is when I get to do interviews.
23: I've met some amazing people, some of them famous, and some of them just ordinary people who have done wonderful things.
24: Unfortunately, I have made myself look silly a few times.
25: My memory isn't that good.
26: It's not that I forget dates or times or anything like that, but once, in the middle of talking to a politician, I forgot their name.
27: That was not good.
28: I had never thought that I would have a successful career as a radio presenter when I was at university.
29: I was always interested in teaching or acting, but if I changed careers now, I would definitely be a reporter of some kind as I love talking to people.
30: Well, that's a little bit about me.
31: If any of you are free this weekend and aren't too busy studying or going to clubs, why not come and see me at a charity event I'm doing at Hatfield House?
32: If you want to make a note of that, it's spelled H a t f i e l d house.
33: I hope to see some of you there.
34: 
35: Now, listen again.
36: Good morning.
37: Thanks for inviting me to come and talk to you all today.
38: I have been a radio presenter for 10 years now.
39: I started doing DJ work for the University Radio station.
40: Strangely, I wasn't studying music or art.
41: In fact, I was a history student, but I've always loved music.
42: I do the breakfast show Monday to Friday.
43: I start at 6:00 a.m. and I'm not much of a breakfast person, so I don't eat before the show.
44: Everyone eats and drinks loads of strong coffee, but I'm a tea man myself.
45: One big cup, and then I'm ready to start.
46: Once I finished the show at 10:00, I have my breakfast then and a glass of juice.
47: I love my job because I get to play great music.
48: The best thing of all is when I get to do interviews.
49: I've met some amazing people, some of them famous, and some of them just ordinary people who have done wonderful things.
50: Unfortunately, I have made myself look silly a few times.
51: My memory isn't that good.
52: It's not that I forget dates or times or anything like that, but once, in the middle of talking to a politician, I forgot their name.
53: That was not good.
54: I had never thought that I would have a successful career as a radio presenter when I was at university.
55: I was always interested in teaching or acting, but if I changed careers now, I would definitely be a reporter of some kind as I love talking to people.
56: Well, that's a little bit about me.
57: If any of you are free this weekend and aren't too busy studying or going to clubs, why not come and see me at a charity event I'm doing at Hatfield House?
58: If you want to make a note of that, it's spelled H a t f i e l d house.
59: I hope to see some of you there.
60: 
61: That is the end of part two.

=== PART 3 (type: matching-speakers) ===
1: Part three.
2: You will hear people speaking in different situations.
3: Match each speaker, 15 to 18, to the options, A F.
4: You'll hear five short extracts in which people are talking about visits they have made to museums.
5: While you listen, you must complete both tasks.
6: You now have 45 seconds to look at part four.
7: Speaker one.
8: I spent last weekend at a friend's.
9: His parents live on the coast.
10: He went off somewhere on Saturday leaving me struggling with the history course work I had to finish by Monday.
11: I wandered into the town center and saw the museum, and I remembered how my mother always used to say that local museums are often a mine of information, and I needed inspiration.
12: I bought my ticket from the affable guy on duty.
13: There was plenty of material, well displayed, and a temporary exhibition of deep-sea fishing equipment.
14: But more importantly, all the stuff was closely associated with the town and reflected its history as a once thriving fishing port.
15: Speaker two.
16: Going to museums is not something I often do.
17: At the moment, I get enough lectures and information overload at college.
18: But Dad's got himself a metal detector and become a treasure hunter.
19: Last week, he found this funny little brooch, and I said I'd show it to someone who'd know what it was.
20: There were a whole lot of people there.
21: Maybe there was something special going on, and the staff kept me hanging about.
22: So, to fill the time, I tried out one of those tape machines and listened to a lively commentary, which certainly made the displays and reconstructions more relevant.
23: I didn't come back with any good news for Dad though.
24: No treasure this time.
25: Speaker three.
26: I've got a German friend staying at the moment, and last week, I dragged him off to the town museum.
27: I thought he might learn a bit of local history.
28: A team of archeologists have been working in the town center car park and unearthed an unusual bit of prehistoric pottery.
29: It's in the museum for now, and I was very keen to take a look and see what the experts were saying about it.
30: My friend said he'd bring his new camera.
31: The hoard has already been researched in detail, and the staff have produced an in-depth explanatory leaflet reflecting this.
32: I was really pleased to learn so much, and my friend was pretty chuffed at how his new camera performed.
33: Speaker four.
34: I remember going to our local museum when I was in primary school.
35: It was very boring.
36: But I hadn't been back again until last week.
37: I was really surprised to find they'd made several changes.
38: They have those audio guides now and weekly lectures, and the information boards have been updated.
39: And to crown it all, instead of having everything in cabinets, they've built mock up scenes, like a medieval kitchen, for example.
40: Convincingly realistic and much more effective.
41: I managed to do some half-decent sketches of them.
42: A friend in the states studying the period had asked me to do this for him.
43: There were a lot of people.
44: I'm not surprised the place is more popular these days.
45: Now you'll hear part four again.
46: Speaker one.
47: I spent last week weekend at a friend's.
48: His parents live on the coast.
49: He went off somewhere on Saturday leaving me struggling with the history course work I had to finish by Monday.
50: I wandered into the town center and saw the museum and I remembered how my mother always used to say that local museums are often a mine of information and I needed inspiration.
51: I bought my ticket from the affable guy on duty.
52: There was plenty of material well displayed and a temporary exhibition of deep-sea fishing equipment.
53: But more importantly, all the stuff was closely associated with the town and reflected its history as a once thriving fishing port.
54: Speaker two.
55: Going to museums is not something I often do.
56: At the moment, I get enough lectures and information overload at college, but Dad's got himself a metal detector and become a treasure hunter.
57: Last week, he found this funny little broach, and I said I'd show it to someone who'd know what it was.
58: There were a whole lot of people there.
59: Maybe there was something special going on, and the staff kept me hanging about.
60: So, to fill the time, I tried out one of those tape machines and listened to a lively commentary, which certainly made the displays and reconstructions more relevant.
61: I didn't come back with any good news for Dad, though.
62: No treasure this time.
63: Speaker three.
64: I've got a German friend staying at the moment, and last week, I dragged him off to the town museum.
65: I thought he might learn a bit of local history.
66: A team of archaeologists have been working in the town center car park and unearthed an unusual bit of prehistoric pottery.
67: It's in the museum for now, and I was very keen to take a look and see what the experts were saying about it.
68: My friend said he'd bring his new camera.
69: The hoard has already been researched in detail, and the staff have produced an in-depth explanatory leaflet reflecting this.
70: I was really pleased to learn so much, and my friend was pretty chuffed at how his new camera performed.
71: Speaker four.
72: I remember going to our local museum when I was in primary school.
73: It was very boring.
74: But I hadn't been back again until last week.
75: I was really surprised to find they'd made several changes.
76: They have those audio guides now and weekly lectures, and the information boards have been updated.
77: And to crown it all, instead of having everything in cabinets, they've built mock-up scenes, like a medieval kitchen, for example.
78: Convincingly realistic and much more effective.
79: I managed to do some half-decent sketches of them.
80: A friend in the states studying the period had asked me to do this for him.
81: There were a lot of people.
82: I'm not surprised the place is more popular these days.
83: That is the end of part three.

=== PART 4 (type: map-labeling) ===
1: Part four.
2: You will hear someone giving a talk.
3: Label the places 19 to 23 on the map A-H.
4: There are three extra options which you do not need to use.
5: Mark your answers on the answer sheet.
6: You now have some time to look at questions.
7: Straight across from the library, you'll find the town hall.
8: There's a lovely atrium there, and the cafe serves some very tasty soups and sandwiches.
9: Well worth checking out.
10: The town hall was rebuilt in the 1960s in the same style as the supermarket, which is just beside the police station in Park Lane.
11: That part of Shipsbury was hit by a bomb during the Second World War, so some rebuilding was necessary.
12: You'll find though that the rest of the town center retains its charming historic character, including the post office, which is opposite the Park Hotel.
13: Coming down Sheep Street, you'll find St. Mary's Church at the corner of Church Lane.
14: The church is across the road from the primary school, which is between Sheep Street and the park.
15: On the last Sunday of the month, you can climb the church tower, which gives a lovely view of the river a block away.
16: On your way back to the student center, come along Church Lane.
17: At the intersection with the High Street, you'll find walk and roll, our most popular Chinese takeaway, and with good reason.
18: The food is delicious, and the prices are terribly affordable.
19: Be sure to place your orders before 7:00 p.m. on a Saturday night, or you'll be out of luck.
20: Now, listen again.
21: Straight across from the library, you'll find the town hall.
22: There's a lovely atrium there, and the cafe serves some very tasty soups and sandwiches.
23: Well worth checking out.
24: The town hall was rebuilt in the 1960s in the same style as the supermarket, which is just beside the police station in Park Lane.
25: That part of Shipsbury was hit by a bomb during the Second World War, so some rebuilding was necessary.
26: You'll find though that the rest of the town center retains its charming historic character, including the post office, which is opposite the Park Hotel.
27: Coming down Sheep Street, you'll find St. Mary's Church at the corner of Church Lane.
28: The church is across the road from the primary school, which is between Sheep Street and the park.
29: On the last Sunday of the month, you can climb the church tower, which gives a lovely view of the river a block away.
30: On your way back to the student center, come along Church Lane.
31: At the intersection with the High Street, you'll find walk and roll, our most popular Chinese takeaway, and with good reason.
32: The food is delicious, and the prices are terribly affordable.
33: Be sure to place your orders before 7:00 p.m. on a Saturday night, or you'll be out of luck.
34: That is the end of part four.

=== PART 5 (type: mcq-extracts) ===
1: Narrator: Part five.
2: You will hear three extracts.
3: Choose the correct answer, A, B or C, for each question, 24 to 29.
4: There are two questions for each extract.
5: Mark your answers on the answer sheet.
6: You now have some time to look at questions.
7: 
8: How are you finding the teaching course, Susanna?
9: You seem to have been making good progress so far.
10: Yeah, I'm feeling more confident in front of my students, but I worry about whether they're inspired by the activities I do with them sometimes.
11: I guess this is a wake up call for me that it's just too much to expect them to be as excited about maths as I am.
12: I think when a teacher is motivated, that can't fail to make an impression.
13: You can't expect your students to love a subject unless they can see you love it yourself.
14: Sure, your students will think you're crazy if you talk about math as if it were a spectator sport, but in the end, your attitude will rub off on them.
15: I was reading about some techniques I could try in the classroom to keep their interest levels up.
16: I've been trying to get some more hands-on stuff into my classes.
17: You know, trying things out in a practical sense rather than sticking to boring theory.
18: Sounds like an excellent idea.
19: Students always appreciate a teacher who goes the extra mile for them.
20: 
21: How are you finding the teaching course, Susanna?
22: You seem to have been making good progress so far.
23: Yeah, I'm feeling more confident in front of my students, but I worry about whether they're inspired by the activities I do with them sometimes.
24: I guess this is a wake up call for me that it's just too much to expect them to be as excited about maths as I am.
25: I think when a teach
26: is motivated, that can't fail to make an impression.
27: You can't expect your students to love a subject unless they can see you love it yourself.
28: Sure, your students will think you're crazy if you talk about math as if it were a spectator sport, but in the end, your attitude will rub off on them.
29: I was reading about some techniques I could try in the classroom to keep their interest levels up.
30: I've been trying to get some more hands-on stuff into my classes.
31: You know, trying things out in a practical sense rather than sticking to boring theory.
32: Sounds like an excellent idea.
33: Students always appreciate a teacher who goes the extra mile for them.
34: Narrator: Extract two.
35: You hear a student called Sam telling his friend Ella about a concert he's been to.
36: Now look at questions three and four.
37: 
38: So you decided against the concert then?
39: I thought about it, but I don't really think it's possible to get caught up in the atmosphere when all you see is someone pressing buttons on a computer and tinkling the keys on a synthesizer.
40: That's all this electronic music amounts to.
41: Admittedly, the performer was dressed all in black and she looked like a scene shifter, and the visuals were limited.
42: There was a screen, but just with some sober animations on it.
43: Trees, castles, rippling water, that sort of thing.
44: Yeah, that says it all.
45: But does that matter if the music's brilliant?
46: And it certainly was, but that's just my opinion.
47: Tell me something about her then.
48: Well, she's a student, studying comparative literature, I think.
49: That seems to give a bit of substance to her music.
50: Make it thoughtful and rigorous.
51: Sounds overly serious.
52: Well, it all paid off.
53: When the audience got more lively towards the end, she kept it steady and didn't change pace to build excitement.
54: And she didn't seem to need the pyrotechnics and lasers that so many techies rely on.
55: 
56: So you decided against the concert then?
57: I thought about it, but I don't really think it's possible to get caught up in the atmosphere when all you see is someone pressing buttons on a computer and tinkling the keys on a synthesizer.
58: That's all this electronic music amounts to.
59: Admittedly, the performer was dressed all in black, and she looked like a scene shifter.
60: And the visuals were limited.
61: There was a screen, but just with some sober animations on it.
62: Trees, castles, rippling water, that sort of thing.
63: Yeah, that says it all.
64: But does that matter?
65: If the music's brilliant, and it certainly was, but that's just my opinion.
66: Tell me something about her then.
67: Well, she's a student.
68: Studying comparative literature, I think.
69: That seems to give a bit of substance to her music.
70: Make it thoughtful and rigorous.
71: Sounds overly serious.
72: Well, it all paid off.
73: When the audience got more lively towards the end, she kept it steady and didn't change pace to build excitement.
74: And she didn't seem to need the pyrotechnics and lasers that so many techies rely on.
75: Narrator: Extract three.
76: You hear a woman telling her friend about new policies adopted by her company.
77: Now look at questions five and six.
78: 
79: I heard that people from your office were planting trees last week.
80: What's going on?
81: Sustainability is the new watchword these days.
82: Last year we concentrated on cutting down on our use of paper and providing raw material for more also seemed a good thing to do.
83: And easier, too.
84: Your office is next door to a big forest, isn't it?
85: Yes, very convenient.
86: We're really keen on the idea that the company should be seen to identify with a certain set of values, and I think we were doing just that out there in the woods.
87: So much internal conflict seemed forgotten, too, which may not last, of course.
88: What else have you done?
89: It's not just the trees, of course.
90: We've cut down our carbon footprint and reduced staff travel by encouraging remote working and flexible homeworking.
91: So people have been understandably pleased about that.
92: And word seems to have got round because the last bunch of job applicants were a very noticeably higher caliber than previously, and I'm pretty sure that wasn't just a coincidence, though it wasn't part of our original thinking.
93: There are certainly plenty of happy clients, but they've always been keen on the idea of supporting community projects through our efforts.
94: 
95: I heard that people from your office were planting trees last week.
96: What's going on?
97: Sustainability is the new watchword these days.
98: Last year we concentrated on cutting down on our use of paper and providing raw material for more.
99: Also seemed a good thing to do.
100: And easier too.
101: Your office is next door to a big forest, isn't it?
102: Yes, very convenient.
103: We're really keen on the idea that the company should be seen to identify with a certain set of values, and I think we were doing just that out there in the woods.
104: So much internal conflict seemed forgotten, too, which may not last, of course.
105: What else have you done?
106: It's not just the trees, of course.
107: We've cut down our carbon footprint and reduced staff travel by encouraging remote working and flexible homeworking.
108: So people have been understandably pleased about that.
109: And word seems to have got round because the last bunch of job applicants were a very noticeably higher caliber than previously, and I'm pretty sure that wasn't just a coincidence, though it wasn't part of our original thinking.
110: There are certainly plenty of happy clients, but they've always been keen on the idea of supporting community projects through our efforts.
111: Narrator: That is the end of part five.

=== PART 6 (type: sentence-completion) ===
1: Narrator: Part six.
2: You will hear a scientist called Jim Weller, giving a talk about some robots he has created, and how they function like insects called termites.
3: Complete the sentences with a word or short phrase.
4: You now have 45 seconds to look at part two.
5: 
6: Hi, I'm Jim, and together with colleagues, I've been attempting to create a group of robots that build things in the same impressive way that termites do.
7: Termites are like large ants and build amazingly complex structures called mounds to live in.
8: Unlike bees, termites don't receive instructions from their queen about what to do.
9: In fact, a single worker doesn't know what the other termites are doing, or what the current overall state of the mound looks like.
10: This tells us that large numbers of units working independently, can, paradoxically, build complicated large-scale things together.
11: So, we decided to make and program what I like to call a colony of robots.
12: Now, by giving the robots a picture of what we want them to build, and it doesn't matter how many of them there are, or which robot does what, they do indeed end up building what they're asked for.
13: The robots and termites both have very restricted sensing.
14: A single unit can only tell what's going on right around itself.
15: It's the same with communicating.
16: Rather than communicating with one another directly, termites make alterations to their shared environment and others respond.
17: One deposits some soil, for example, or half-eaten wood.
18: Another one comes along later, and on seeing this, a reaction is triggered.
19: We observed this and devised a similar system with the robots.
20: Like termites, the robots often make errors, for example, trying to pick up a brick and failing.
21: Rather than trying to prevent those errors, we give them enough feedback to help with the recognition and correction process, so they try again until they get it right.
22: So they keep patrolling the structure, fixing only what needs fixing.
23: I've demonstrated this in action several times in public presentations, with one of our robots.
24: It had to try to complete the structure I asked it to, in this case, a staircase.
25: And there was a block missing at the top.
26: So, it had to try and pick up building material from the loading area, and walk up the structure until it discovered exactly what needed attention.
27: In the long term, one day robots like this could build for us in inaccessible or dangerous settings, such as underwater or on Mars.
28: In the shorter term, the same principle applies.
29: So, for instance, if you wanted to position sandbags to protect against rising flood water, or build in difficult Antarctic surroundings, you can imagine how hardware and approaches very much like this could be used.
30: In a sense, termites are like cells in your brain, all acting independently, but interacting with each other, and out of that comes a higher intelligence.
31: And in a similar kind of way, our robots are individuals, moving around independently with no central coordination, and together, hopefully, producing complicated structures.
32: One spin-off piece of research has already been put into place.
33: A Turkish group has been working alongside us to see if the way the robots and termites operate can actually be captured in a mathematical model to be used in future projects.
34: It's a fascinating idea, and I believe there are similar studies with flocks of birds and shoals of fish.
35: Now, let me move on to.
36: 
37: Narrator: Now, listen again.
38: Hi, I'm Jim, and together with colleagues, I've been attempting to create a group of robots that build things in the same impressive way that termites do.
39: Termites are like large ants and build amazingly complex structures called mounds to live in.
40: Unlike bees, termites don't receive instructions from their queen about what to do.
41: In fact, a single worker doesn't know what the other termites are doing, or what the current overall state of the mound looks like.
42: This tells us that large numbers of units working independently, can, paradoxically, build complicated large-scale things together.
43: So, we decided to make and program what I like to call a colony of robots.
44: Now, by giving the robots a picture of what we want them to build, and it doesn't matter how many of them there are, or which robot does what, they do indeed end up building what they're asked for.
45: The robots and termites both have very restricted sensing.
46: A single unit can only tell what's going on right around itself.
47: It's the same with communicating.
48: Rather than communicating with one another directly, termites make alterations to their shared environment and others respond.
49: One deposits some soil, for example, or half-eaten wood.
50: Another one comes along later, and on seeing this, a reaction is triggered.
51: We observed this and devised a similar system with the robots.
52: Like termites, the robots often make errors, for example, trying to pick up a brick and failing.
53: Rather than trying to prevent those errors, we give them enough feedback to help with the recognition and correction process, so they try again until they get it right.
54: So they keep patrolling the structure, fixing only what needs fixing.
55: I've demonstrated this in action several times in public presentations with one of our robots.
56: It had to try to complete the structure I asked it to, in this case, a staircase, and there was a block missing at the top.
57: So, it had to try and pick up building material from the loading area and walk up the structure until it discovered exactly what needed attention.
58: In the long term, one day robots like this could build for us in inaccessible or dangerous settings, such as underwater or on Mars.
59: In the shorter term, the same principle applies.
60: So, for instance, if you wanted to position sandbags to protect against rising flood water, or build in difficult Antarctic surroundings, you can imagine how hardware and approaches very much like this could be used.
61: In a sense, termites are like cells in your brain, all acting independently, but interacting with each other, and out of that comes a higher intelligence.
62: And in a similar kind of way, our robots are individuals, moving around independently with no central coordination, and together, hopefully, producing complicated structures.
63: One spin-off piece of research has already been put into place.
64: A Turkish group has been working alongside us to see if the way the robots and termites operate can actually be captured in a mathematical model to be used in future projects.
65: It's a fascinating idea, and I believe there are similar studies with flocks of birds and shoals of fish.
66: Now, let me move on to
67: 
68: Narrator: That is the end of part six.

