Narrator: Part three.

Study options. You will hear a professor talking to her student about his study options. Before you listen, you have 30 seconds to read questions 21 to 24.

Come in, Ray.
Ray: Thank you, Professor Anderson.
Professor: I've been meaning to contact you, but I just got back last night.
Ray: Where have you been?
Professor: Conferences in Massachusetts and New York.
Ray: For physics?
Professor: Yes.
Ray: Great. I'm looking forward to attending conferences one day.
Professor: I imagine that won't be so far away. I was extremely impressed with your classical mechanics exam. In fact, you were one of only two students out of 180 to get an A+.
Ray: Wow. I really did enjoy the course.
Professor: So, how can I help you?
Ray: I'm sorry to say it's a bit of a long story. You see, I've had to rethink my studies completely, and I wonder if I'm making the right decision.
Professor: You're doing two degrees, aren't you? Science and arts.
Ray: I was doing two. I've decided to focus on science.
Professor: Oh?
Ray: It all came about because I wanted to study abroad for a year. I was thinking about Edinburgh. Firstly, I sought approval from the maths and physics departments. I wanted to take quantum mechanics and computer simulations at Edinburgh.
Professor: Those are third year courses, right?
Ray: Yeah. So, I received approval from maths and physics. The stumbling block was the higher authority, the science faculty. When I submitted my application, it was rejected.
Professor: What?
Ray: It turns out that students who study abroad for a year can only do first or second year courses, or third year courses in a subject that's not their major.
Professor: I've never heard that before.
Ray: Needless to say, the lecturers who approved my transfer hadn't either, and nor does the regulation appear on the Science faculty website.
Professor: That'd be right. This faculty is disorganized.
Ray: So, then I thought I'd take arts courses at Edinburgh and leave the third year maths until I came back. I quickly got approval for second year history and philosophy from the Arts faculty.
Professor: When are you heading off?
Ray: That's just it. During this process, I began to think carefully about my studies. To be honest, the arts courses I've done were less challenging than the science ones, so I've decided to drop arts.

Narrator: Before you listen to the rest of the conversation, you have 30 seconds to read questions 25 to 30.

Professor: Where do I figure in all this?
Ray: The first week after I'd made my decision, I felt fine. Without doing the arts courses, I could finish my science degree earlier. But this week, I've had some doubts. When I started the two degrees, lecturers in the science faculty assured me that these days, scientists need a rounded education, which they get if they take some arts courses. I was even told I'd learn to write and think better if I did philosophy.
Professor: I do think the claims made by some lecturers are dubious.
Ray: Then, there's the fact that now I'm going to be stuck here next year. I was so excited about going to Europe.
Professor: It is disappointing to give that up. Still, the reason I wanted to contact you, Ray, is that I'm looking for students to work six hours a week in my lab. It's paid work, not highly paid, but probably better than working in a bar. Also, we've just bought a new laser, which you'd learn to use.
Ray: That sounds excellent.
Professor: As to going abroad, why not do your postgraduate studies in the US? There's some amazing physics being done in Massachusetts. If you like, I can send you the papers from the conference.
Ray: Thanks.
Professor: Of course, I'd be sad to lose you if you did go abroad, but an A+ student like you has a very good chance of winning a major scholarship.
Ray: Goodness, I've never even considered that.
Professor: Personally, I think committing yourself to science is the way to go.
Ray: Thanks, Professor Anderson. You've taken a load off my mind. Now I don't have to deal with Hegel or Leibniz. I've plenty of time to read those conference papers.

Narrator: That is the end of part three. You now have 30 seconds to check your answers to part three.